PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
उत्पाद मानुयल 
पैकेजबंद प्राकृतिक तमनरल जल - वितिवि 
IS 13428:2005 के अनुसार 
 
PRODUCT MANUAL 
FOR PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER 
ACCORDING TO IS 13428 : 2005 
 
भारतीय मानक ब्य
ू
रो (नन
ां
य्ता म
ू
तया
ु
कन )विवनयम 8102 की स्कीम-I के तहत यह उत््ाद मान
ां
यल प्रमाणीकरणके प्रचलन मे रीवत और ्ारदवशिता के 
स
ां
स
ु
गता स
ां
वनवित करने के वलए सभी क्षेत्रीय/शाखा कायािलयों एि
ु
 लाइसेन्स धाररयों द्वारा स
ु
दभि सामग्री के य् मे उ्योग वकया जाएगा। बीआईएस 
लाइसेन्स/प्रमाण ्त्र प्राप्त करने के इच्छ
ां
क भािी आिेदकों द्वारा भी इस दस्तािेज़ का उ्योग वकया जा सकता है। 
 
This Product Manual shall be used as reference material by all Regional/Branch Offices & licensees  to ensure 
coherence  of  practice  and  transparency  in  operation  of  certification  under  Scheme-I  of Bureau  of  Indian 
Standards (Conformity Assessment) Regulations, 2018 for various products. The document may also be used 
by prospective applicants desirous of obtaining BIS certification licence/certificate. 
 
1. 
 उत््ाद 
Product 
: IS 13428 : 2005 
 
 शीर्िक 
Title 
: Packaged Natural Mineral Water 
 
 स
ु
शोधन स
ु
ख्या 
No. of Amendments 
: 11 
2. 
Introduction and Salient changes in 
: Please refer Annex -A 
this version of the manual 
3. Product Specific Guidelines: 
a) 
Guidelines for processing 
: Please refer Annex –B 
Applications for grant of licence and 
change in scope of licence 
b) Guidelines for Surveillance : Please refer Annex – C 
c) 
Guidelines for actions in case of 
: Please refer Annex – D 
non-conformity including 
suspension and revocation of 
suspension of licence 
4. 
 ्रीक्षण उ्करणो की स
ू
ची 
List of Test Equipment 
: Please refer ANNEX –E 
5. 
वनरीक्षण ि ्रीक्षण स्कीम 
Scheme of Inspection and Testing 
: Please refer ANNEX –F 
6. Guidelines for Special Situations : Please refer ANNEX –G 
7.  Hygiene Checklist  Please refer ANNEX –H (It shall be verified, filled up, duly-
signed and uploaded as an attachment alongwith the Factory 
Test report. Hygiene assessment shall be done during all 
inspections(Preliminary inspection, Surveillance inspection, 
Verification inspection) 
8. लाइसेन्स का कायिक्षेत्र / Scope of the Licence : 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
IS 13428:2005 के अन
ु
सार मानक म
ु
हर का उपयोग करने के लिए िाइसेंस लनम्नलिलित काययक्षेत्र के लिए प्रदान लकया जाता 
है: 
“Licence is granted to use Standard Mark as per IS 13428 : 2005 with the following scope: 
 
Name of the product Natural Mineral Water 
Varieties (Packaging) 
Mention material (PE/PET/PVC/Glass etc.), type of containers 
(cup/bottles/jars etc.) and capacities in ml or litres (500 ml/1 
litre/20 litres etc.) 
For example: PET Bottles of 500 ml, 1litre, 1.5 litre capacity 
and/or PET Jars of 20 litres capacity 
(any other pack sizes; containers for all pack sizes need to be 
in conformance to IS 15410 (as per latest amendment)  
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Manak Bhawan, 9, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,    
New Delhi – 110002 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
Annexure A 
Salient changes in this version of the manual 
 
1. The first edition Manual for Packaged Water, which provided internal guidelines to BIS Certification 
officers for certification of Packaged Drinking Water (Other Than Packaged Natural Mineral Water) 
(PDW) and Packaged Natural Mineral Water (PNMW) was issued in 2005. Following changes in the 
standard and feedback obtained during certification, the second and third editions of this Manual were 
issued in 2007 and 2013, respectively. 
 
2. Following the revision of the BIS Act, 1986 as the BIS Act, 2016 in March 2017 and subsequent issue of 
general guidelines for certification based on the Act and regulations framed thereunder, it was decided to 
prepare  a  Scheme  of  Inspection  and  Testing (SIT)  as  per  the  provisions  of  the  new  regulations  for  both 
PDW/PNMW. Accordingly, SITs for both PDW and PNMW were issued in 2018-19. 
 
3. Subsequently, it was also felt that the Manual for Packaged Water also needs to be revised to align with the 
provisions of the existing Indian Standard, and the BIS Act, with a view to consolidate the various guidelines 
for certification of packaged water in a single, user-friendly document. Accordingly, in line with the practice 
for  other  products,  separate product  manuals  for PDW  and PNMW were framed. This document pertains 
only to PNMW manual, the PDW manual has been issued separately. 
 
4. The salient changes in this version of the PNMW manual are as follows: 
 
i. The manual has been updated with respect to various amendments to IS 13428 (upto Amendment 
No. 11)  and guidelines  issued from time to time.  
 
ii. The list of test equipment has been updated as per revised test methods wherever applicable; and 
the list of test equipment for Uranium has been included. 
 
iii. In line with CMD-2 circular dated 22-03-2022 regarding testing of Pesticide Residues in Packaged 
Natural Mineral Water as per IS 13428:2005, it has been specified that out of all the samples drawn 
for factory/market surveillance in a year, only one sample may be got tested for pesticide residues. 
The  same  shall  be  clearly  indicated  on  the  test  requests  generated  by  BOs/outsourced  agencies. 
However, if a sample fails in the requirement of Pesticide Residues, then the next 3 consecutive 
samples (factory/market) of that licence  shall be  tested for all tests  including Pesticide Residues 
(except  Radioactive  residues),  till  the  3  consecutive  samples  are found  conforming  to all 
requirements tested including pesticide residues. 
 
5. The salient features of the erstwhile product manual(PM/13428/2, July 2020), which remains in vogue 
and are to be followed:  
 
i. As  per  Guidelines  for  Grant  of  Licence  (GoL)  as  per  the  conformity  assessment  Scheme – I  of 
Schedule – II of BIS (Conformity Assessment) Regulations, 2018, the provision for grant of licence 
under option 2 (simplified procedure) has been excluded. 
 
ii. It has been specified that the compliance of source of water and process adopted by the 
manufacturer for treatment/disinfection of the water shall be verified and details thereof reported 
during preliminary inspection. 
 
iii. In  line  with  CMD-2  circular  dated  16.09.2019  regarding  testing  of  market  samples  of  reusable 
containers of PNMW, it is specified that   separate samples of containers need not be drawn during 
factory and market surveillance for testing. The possible tests on containers will be carried out on 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
the containers of the samples of Natural Mineral Water drawn for chemical/microbiological/other 
tests during factory and market surveillance. 
 
iv. It is a l s o  permitted  that at the  grant of licence stage and during  operation  of  the  licence  stage,  for 
inclusion of containers sizes, the manufacturer may offer only (at least) one sample of packaged natural 
mineral water in any one variety of packaging along with conforming tests reports issued by BIS 
recognized labs for the other varieties of packaging/containers intended to be covered in the scope  
of the licence. (Test reports may not be required in case containers are ISI marked).   
v. It was also specified that although in case of water samples, consecutive non-conformity will attract 
suspension, in case of non-conformity of containers, suspension will be attracted only in case 
the  same variety of container (i.e. same material, type and capacity of container) fails more than 
two times consecutively. However, first failure will attract suspension in case of parameters 
concerning radioactive residues. 
 
vi. As per the previous Water Manual, if a fresh application has been submitted after closure of earlier 
application or expiry/cancellation of earlier licence and the closure of application/licence was for 
reasons other than failure in radioactive residues, fresh sample of water need not be drawn for 
testing of radioactive residues, if evidence is available that the source of raw water remained the 
same  as  that  in  earlier  application/licence,  provided  that  radioactive  residue  TR  of the  sample 
drawn  by  BIS  during  verification  visit  passes  and  is  not  older  than  five  years.  The earlier  test 
reports of sample drawn by BIS (not older than five years) shall be accepted within a period of five 
years. This provision has been removed in this version since present regulations/guidelines do not 
permit acceptance of applications based on old test reports. 
 
vii.  IS 11984 has been specified as a reference Indian Standard for glass bottles. If any manufacturer 
intends  to  use  glass  bottles  for  packaging,  it  shall  be  included  in  the licence. The separate 
processing line for filling the glass bottles may be verified by BIS during  the  next  visit and 
necessary steps in the process for ensuring sterility of bottles may be adopted like steam sterilizing, 
hot water rinsing, UV sterilization or combination thereof. In case of lug caps containing plastic 
lining, food grade certificate or OSL report for migration testing may be accepted. 
 
viii. Manufacturers need not maintain separate chemists and microbiologist and alternatively, may keep 
even one testing person, in case he/she is found competent for both chemical and microbiological 
testing. This shall be duly recorded in PIR. 
 
ix. Guidelines  for  special  situations  faced  in  certification  of  packaged  water  have  been  addressed 
(Annex  G)  covering  aspects  like  change  in  source  of  raw  water,  shelf  life,  brand  name/label 
approvals. It has been specified that in case the brand name/trademark submitted by the firm is a 
registered brand name/trademark, no objection to its use shall be raised even if the brand 
name/trademark is  found to be in non-compliance to Clause 8 of IS 13428. However, in such a 
case, the Head BO concerned shall communicate the details of such cases to CMD-2 for taking up 
with the concerned authorities. 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
Annex B 
Product Specific Guidelines for processing 
applications for grant of licence and change in scope of licence 
 
 
B-1. Application for grant of licence 
 
i. Domestic manufacturers of PNMW shall apply for grant of licence for his unit online through the 
Manakonline system  as  per  the  provided  application  format  i.e.  as  per  Form  V  as  specified  in 
Scheme  I  of  Schedule  II  of  BIS  (Conformity  Assessment  Regulations),  2018.  (Presently  foreign 
applications under FMCS are being processed on offline mode). 
 
ii. Applications will only be accepted under Option 1 (Normal procedure), i.e. after receipt of the 
application and          ensuring completeness of the application, a visit will be paid by BIS to the factory 
of  the  applicant for  assessment  of  the  manufacturing  infrastructure, production  process,  quality 
control, testing  capabilities, assessment of hygiene conditions and sample will be drawn for testing 
in third party laboratory. 
 
B-2 Preliminary Inspection 
 
B-2.1 During preliminary inspection, the documents/aspects as mentioned in general GoL guidelines 
shall be verified and the observations recorded in the Preliminary Inspection Report in the format circulated 
by CMD. 
 
B-2.2 The actual factory layout shall be verified against the layout submitted with application. The layout 
should clearly indicate the different locations preferably including the following: 
 
a) Location of source of raw water and its entry point, pipeline etc. 
b) Plant for the manufacture of the product (with various stages) 
c) Filling/packing areas, change room, toilet(s), 
e) Entry/exit with indications of double door/door closures/Air curtains wherever provided 
f) Stores for packaging material and finished product 
g) Laboratory 
h) Actual boundary/perimeter of the establishment 
i) If the premises are also used for residential quarters/other purposes, then specific mention of 
the same be made with identified locations. 
 
B-2.3 As product is under mandatory certification, it is unlikely to be in “production” during PI. It is 
therefore essential to get some production & filling/packing done as ‘Trial Batch’ during the visit and then 
make comments on the firm’s capability for the same. 
 
B-2.4  It  should  be  clearly  reported  in  the  PIR  as  to  whether  the  filling/packaging  adopted  are  manually 
operated or automatic. It may be noted that the plastic cups, tumbler, pouch bottles are required to be filled 
only through automatic machine. However, jars maybe filled manually also. 
 
B-2.5. In addition, the following product specific aspects shall also be verified and observations recorded 
in the Preliminary Inspection Report or in an Annexure to that report: 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
i. Availability of all manufacturing facilities including filling and/or packaging machinery for the 
varieties applied for to be verified and observations recorded; 
 
ii. Compliance to hygienic practices as per Annex B of IS 13428, to be verified and observations to 
be recorded as per Hygiene Checklist (as per Annex-H). 
 
iii. As per Cl 3.1 of IS 13428:2005, Natural Mineral Water is: a) is obtained directly from natural or 
drilled sources from underground water-bearing strata; b) it is characterized by its content of certain 
mineral salts and their relative proportions and the presence of trace elements or of other 
constituents; c) of the  constancy  of its composition and the stability  of its discharge and its 
temperature, due  account being taken of the cycles of minor natural fluctuations; d) it is collected 
under conditions which guarantee the original microbiological purity and chemical composition of 
essential components; e) it is packaged close to the point of emergence of the source with particular 
hygienic precautions; f) it is not subjected to any treatment other than those permitted under Cl 4.1 
of  IS  13428. Compliance to Cl 3.1 a) to f) shall be  ensured  and  reported in  the Preliminary 
Inspection report. 
 
iv. As per Cl.3.1.6 of IS 13428:2005, Natural Spring water is natural mineral water which is derived 
from an underground formation from which water flows naturally to the surface of the earth at an 
identified location. Spring water shall be collected only at the spring or through a borehole 
tapping the underground formation feeding the spring. There shall be a natural force causing the 
water to flow to the surface through an orifice. Compliance to Cl 3.1.6 and 6.4 shall be ensured and 
reported in the preliminary inspection report in case manufacturer claims the natural mineral water 
as Natural spring water. 
 
v. The transport of natural mineral water in bulk containers for packaging or any other process before 
packaging is prohibited. 
 
vi. Natural mineral water shall have the constancy of its composition and the stability of its discharge 
and temperature, due account being taken of the cycles of minor natural fluctuations. Evidence 
for constancy of water composition at source on account of cycles of minor natural fluctuations 
during different seasons in a year shall comprise of the following: 
 
a. Undertaking  for  submission  of Test  report (from  any  BIS  approved  OSL)  of  all  the  major 
seasons (over a period of one year) for all the major   physicochemical parameters, complying to 
the requirements of IS 10500; 
b. Record of temperature at discharge point/ point of emergence (by manufacturer); and 
c. Report from the Hydrogeologist covering genesis of natural mineral water; period of its 
residence in the ground; chemical, physical and radiological qualities; and the risk of pollution 
 
 
vii. Availability of required testing facilities, as per the ISS should be verified and recorded. The test 
equipment should have valid calibration on the day of the visit. Calibration should be done from 
NABL  accredited  laboratory  or  any  other  laboratory  provided  traceability  to  NPL  is  established 
through  the  calibration  certificates.  Calibration  of  Analytical  Balance,  temperature  indicators, 
pressure gauge of autoclave and spectrophotometer (internal/in-house or from an outside lab) is 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
considered necessary at least once a year. Indicative List of test equipment and chemicals required 
for testing of Natural Mineral Water is given at Annex E for guidance. Status of test equipment 
calibration observed from calibration certificates should be certified. 
 
viii. Testing person(s) shall be science/engineering graduate from disciplines such as 
chemistry/chemical  engineering/  microbiology/  biotechnology/ biochemistry/  food  technology/ 
botany and other biological/ life sciences. Engineering graduates from disciplines such as chemical 
engineering  may  also  be  engaged  as  testing  persons. Availability  of  testing  person(s), his/her 
competence, qualifications and experience shall be verified and reported. One testing personnel 
may be allowed in case he/she is found competent for both chemical and microbiological testing 
and if so, this shall be duly recorded in Inspection Report. 
B-3 Factory testing 
 
B-3.1  One sample  of  the  product  shall  be  tested  in  the  factory  during  the  preliminary  inspection  for 
preferably following requirements: Description, Colour, Odour, Taste, Turbidity, Total Dissolved Solids 
(TDS) by gravimetric method as per IS 3025(Part-16), pH, Chloride and Alkalinity. 
 
B-3.2 In case any non-conformity is observed during factory testing, no sample shall be drawn for 
independent testing in third party lab. (Please refer Annex D for guidelines to be followed in case 
of non conformity) 
B-4 Sample for Independent Testing 
B-4.1 If the sample passes in factory testing, sample of Natural Mineral Water shall be drawn and sent for 
complete testing for all requirements of the Indian Standard. The following details should be mentioned 
in the test request (generated through Manakonline): 
 
i. Specify if it is Natural Spring Water (as per Cl. 3.1.6 o IS 13428:2005) 
 
ii. Date of manufacture/packing and batch number; 
 
iii. Expiry/Use by; 
 
iv. Quantity (number of containers and total quantity of Natural Mineral Water in litre or milliliter), 
 
v. Type, material and capacity of containers 
 
vi. Declared wall thickness of container(s)/width of film of pouch 
 
 
B-4.2 In case of foreign manufacturers, test report through LIMS is not applicable, till applicants/licencees 
under FMCS are brought on online mode, integrated with LIMS. 
 
B-4.3 However, in case the manufacturer intends to cover more than one variety of packaging in the scope 
of  licence,  he  need  not  offer  samples  of  each  variety  of  packaging  during  the  factory  visit  (preliminary 
inspection) for testing in third party lab. However, it shall be ensured that the manufacturing facilities for 
manufacturing other packing sizes (if applicable) like moulding machines, etc, are available. He may offer 
sample of the product in at least one variety of packaging, along with either: 
 
a. Conforming tests reports issued by BIS recognized labs (through LIMS only) for the other varieties of 
packaging/containers intended to be covered in the scope of the licence. These test reports issued 
through LIMS, shall not be older than 90 days  on the date of submission of application.  

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 In case an application is received for more than one variety of container and the variety of the container 
drawn  during  preliminary  inspection, does  not  conform  to  the  requirements  of  the  Indian  Standard, 
however the product (Packaged Natural Mineral water) is found conforming to all the requirements of 
the Indian Standard, then the application is to be processed for Grant of Licence for all those varieties 
of container packaging, whose conforming test report has been submitted with the application. Under 
such circumstances, the variety of container, which has not been found conforming to the requirements 
of relevant Indian Standard, shall be excluded from the scope. 
 
 Further there may be a situation when applicant has applied for one variety only and the container is 
found failing but the product (PNMW) is passing. Under such circumstances, only the improved sample 
of the container as offered by the manufacturer, maybe tested for conformity to the requirements of the 
relevant Indian Standard. 
. 
 
OR 
 
b. In case the applicant uses/intends to use ISI Marked Plastic Containers as per IS 15410 or ISI Marked 
polyethylene flexible pouches as per IS 15609 or ISI Marked Paper based multilayer laminated/extruded 
composite cartons  as per IS 17753 or ISI  marked  aluminum cans  as per the finalized  draft of Indian 
Standard  'Aluminum  cans  for  packaged  natural  mineral  water  and  packaged  drinking  water — 
Specification'  [Doc:  PGD  38  (20182)], the  manufacturer may  submit           a  consent  letter  from  the  BIS 
licensed  manufacturer of  the  container, that  he  has  agreed  to  supply  ISI Marked  containers  for  the 
required varieties (to be explicitly mentioned in the letter) to the applicant firm. In that case test reports 
from  third  party  labs  need  not  be  submitted  for  those  varieties. The letter from BIS  licensed 
manufacturers shall not be older than 90 days on the date of submission of application. The test 
certificates of the containers issued as per relevant Indian Standard(s) by the BIS licensed manufacturer 
is required to be submitted at the time of submission of application / before inspection, for examination 
by BIS. 
 
B-4.4 In case the applicant is adopting more than one type of processes/sources of raw water, separate 
samples shall be drawn for each process/source. 
B-4.5 The sample quantity to be sent to the third-party lab for testing is as follows: 
 
i) Natural Mineral Water 
 
a) For all parameters other than radioactive residues - A sample containing approximately 18 litres of 
Natural Mineral Water (NMW) in two parts is adequate, if packed in 1 liter or smaller containers but 
in case the samples are available in large size packages, minimum two such packages are required as 
microbiological laboratory needs separate sample for ensuring aseptic handling. For example: 
 
Capacity of the container 
Number of containers to be drawn 
(cup/bottle/jar) in litres 
1 18 
2 9 
5 4 
10 2 
20 2 
25 2 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
For Pouches: 2 bags/cartons each containing total of atleast 100 pouches + Film. 
 
b) For Parameters concerning Radio-active Residue 
 
 
In addition to the above, sample shall also be drawn for testing parameters concerning radioactive 
residues. A sample of 10 litres is adequate. 
 
(ii)  Sample of packaging material (containers)   :: 
                                                                                                                                                
Capacity of the container 
(cup/bottle/jar) in ml/L 
Number of containers (including caps) to be drawn 
200ml 30(empty with caps) + 9(filled)+40 caps 
250ml 27 (empty with caps) + 9 (filled) + 40 (caps)   
500ml 24 (empty with caps) + 9 (filled) +40 caps 
1 liter 21 (empty with caps) + 9 (filled) + 40 caps 
2 litre 18 Empty (with caps) + 8 (filled) + 40caps 
5 litre and above 7 Empty (with caps) + 8 (filled) + 25 caps 
 
 
Pouches: 1 bag of 50 filled pouches + 18 meter film+ 10 Nos. of Preformed pouches of dimension 125 
mm X 200 mm. 
Cup/Glass along with peelable seal: 37 (Empty) + 15 (filled) + 18 meter film of peelable seal + 8 
preformed pouches of 125 mm x 200 mm of peelable seal. 
Note 1: The pouches shall be made in the presence of BIS officer, during inspection, and, may be printed 
with only details like batch number, date of manufacturing, Expiry/Use by,, capacity, using ink to be used 
by the manufacturer for marking on the pouches. This will facilitate testing of pouches for ink adhesion 
test  and  product  resistance  test.  This  is  being  allowed  as  manufacturer  cannot  get  the  pouch  film rolls 
printed with all other details such as Standard Mark etc. before the GOL. 
 
Note 2: IS 11984 has been specified as a reference Indian Standard for glass bottles/tumbler, however such 
containers  need  not  be  tested. However,  if  any  manufacturer  intends  to  use  such  container,  it  shall  be 
included  in  the  licence.. The separate  processing  line  for  filling  the  glass bottles  may  be  verified  by  BIS 
during the next surveillance visit and necessary steps in the process for ensuring sterility of bottles may be 
adopted  like  steam sterilizing,  hot  water  rinsing  or  combination  thereof.  In  case  of  lug  caps  containing 
plastic lining, food grade certificate or OSL report for migration testing may be accepted. 
 
Note 3: Effort shall be made, as far as possible, to send samples without the manufacturer’s identification 
and/or markings. Any label and/or manufacturer's identification from the bottles/Jars shall be removed or 
defaced. 
 
Note 4: The manufacturer’s declaration with respect to the minimum wall thickness (Top/Middle/Bottom) of 
the container and shelf life of product, shall                   be obtained and the same to be mentioned in the test request 
 
B-5 Change in Scope of Licence 
 
B-5.1 For the purpose of certification of PNMW, change in scope of licence pertains only to 
addition/deletion of the varieties of packaging covered in the scope of the licence. 
 
B-5.2 In case a licensee intends to add new varieties of packaging in scope of licence, he shall submit an 
application in the Form – XIV along with requisite fee and relevant documents. 
 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
B-5.3 In addition, he shall submit conforming third party lab test report(s) of samples of each variety of 
the packaging (i.e. each material (PET/PE etc.), form or type (cup/bottle/jar) and capacity in ml or litres) 
intended to be added to the scope of licence. 
 
B-5.4  In  addition  to  these  guidelines,  Guidelines  for  Grant  of  Licence  (GoL)  and  Change  in  Scope  of 
Licence  (CSoL)  as  per  the  conformity  assessment  Scheme – I  of  Schedule – II  of  BIS  (Conformity 
Assessment) Regulations, 2018 issued by CMD-1 shall be followed. 
 
 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
Annexure C 
Guidelines for Surveillance 
Surveillance consists of two activities in case of Natural Mineral Water certification i.e. surveillance visits 
at factory premises (which includes testing of sample drawn from factory) and drawl of samples from the 
market for third party lab testing. Product Specific guidelines for these are as follows: 
C-1. Factory Surveillance 
 
C-1.1 During factory surveillance  visit, the compliance  to the requirements  of the  SIT and  ISS shall be 
verified  and  the observations  recorded  in  the  Report  of  Periodic  Inspection  in  the  format  circulated  by 
CMD (General Format applicable for all products), 
 
C-1.2 However, in addition, the following product specific aspects shall also be verified and observations 
recorded in the Report of Periodic Inspection or in an Annexure to that report: 
 
i. Any change in manufacturing facilities including filling and/or packaging machinery for the 
varieties applied for to be verified and observations recorded; 
 
ii. Compliance to hygienic practices as per Annex B of IS 13428 to be verified and observations 
to be recorded as per Hygiene Checklist at Annex-H of this product manual. 
 
iii. Any change in Source of Water shall be checked for and reported. Any observations 
including non-compliance to IS requirements to be reported. 
 
iv. Any observations including non-compliance to IS requirements to be reported. 
 
v. Any change in nature of treatments processes to be verified and observations including 
compliance thereon to be reported (This may be mentioned in the process flowchart submitted.) 
 
vi. Availability of required testing facilities, as per the ISS should be verified and recorded. 
Any change in the test facilities should be checked for and reported. The test equipment 
should have valid calibration on the day of the visit. Calibration should be done from 
NABL accredited laboratory or any other laboratory provided traceability to NPL is established 
through   the calibration certificates. Calibration of Analytical Balance, temperature 
indicators, pressure gauge of autoclave and spectrophotometer (internal/in-house or from 
outside lab.) is considered necessary at least once a year. Indicative List of test equipment 
and chemicals required for testing of Natural Mineral Water is given at Annex E for 
guidance. Status of test equipment  calibration observed from calibration certificates 
should be reported. 
 
vii. Any change in testing person(s) should be checked for and reported along with 
comments on the competence, qualifications and experience. 
 
viii. Compliance to requirements of SIT shall be verified and observations reported. 
 
C-2 Factory testing 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
C-2.1  One  sample  of  the  product  shall  be  tested  in  the  factory  during  the  preliminary  inspection  for 
preferably following requirements: Colour, Odour, Taste, Turbidity, pH, Chloride, Alkalinity. 
 
C-2.2  In  case  any  non-conformity  is  observed  during  factory  testing,  no  sample  shall  be  drawn  for 
independent  testing  in  third  party  lab.  (Please  refer  Annex  D  for  actions  to  be  taken  in  case  of  non- 
conformity) 
 
C-3 Sample for Independent Testing 
C-3.1 If the sample passes in factory testing, sample of Natural Mineral Water shall be drawn and sent for 
complete  testing  for all  requirements of  the  Indian  Standard  IS  13428:2005 except  the  parameters 
concerning radioactive residues. However, out of all the samples drawn for 
factory/market surveillance in a year, only one sample may be got tested for pesticide residues, which is 
required   to   be   clearly   indicated   on   the   test   requests   generated   by   BOs/outsourced   agencies. 
But, if   a   sample   fails   in   the   requirement   of   Pesticide   Residues,   then   the   next   3   consecutive 
samples    (factory/market)    of    that    licence    shall    be    tested    for    all    tests    including    Pesticide 
Residues(except   Radioactive   residues),   till   the   3   consecutive   samples   are   found   conforming   to 
all requirements tested including pesticide residues.  The following details should be mentioned in the test 
request (generated through Manakonline): 
i. Specify if it is Natural spring water (as per Cl 3.1.6 of IS 13428:2005) 
 
ii. Date of manufacture/packing and batch number; 
 
iii. Expiry/Use by or Best Before Days/Months from the date of Packaging/Manufacture ; 
 
iv. Quantity (number of containers and total quantity of Natural Mineral Water in litre or 
milliliter), 
 
v. Type, material and capacity of containers 
 
vi. Declared wall thickness of container(s)/width of film of pouch 
 
vii. ‘All tests/All Chemical tests/All Possible tests, except Pesticide Residues and Radioactive 
Residues’   (where   pesticide   residue   is   not   required   to   be   tested) 
And 
All tests/All Chemical tests/All Possible tests, including Pesticide Residues, but excluding 
Radioactive Residues (where pesticide residue is required to be tested) ‘ 
 
C-3.2 In case the applicant is adopting more than one type of processes/sources of raw water, samples shall 
be drawn for each process/source by rotation during factory surveillance. 
 
C-3.3 The sample quantity to be sent to the third party lab for testing is as follows: 
 
i) Natural Mineral Water 
For  all  parameters  other  than  radioactive  residues - A  sample  containing  approximately  18 litres  of 
packaged water (NMW) in two parts is adequate, if packed in 1 liter or smaller containers but in case the 
samples are available in large size packages, minimum two such packages are required as microbiological 
laboratory needs separate sample for ensuring aseptic handling. . Details of pack sizes to be drawn are as 
given above, under clause B-4.5 (i)(a) 
 
For Pouches: Details of pack sizes to be drawn are as given above, under clause B-4.5 (i)(a) 
 
C-4 Market Surveillance 
 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
C-4.1 While obtaining samples of Natural Mineral Water from the market, it should be ensured that the 
samples  being  drawn are  bearing  genuine  ISI  mark.  This  may  be  done  by  checking  the  licence  number 
printed on the label. In case  it is found that the  ISI  mark is spurious, the sample shall not be drawn for 
testing and suitable action should be initiated for further investigation. 
 
C-4.2 For sending the market sample to the lab for testing, the following details should be mentioned in 
the test request (generated through Manakonline): 
i. Specify if it is Natural Spring water (as per Cl 3.1.6 of IS 13428:2005) 
 
ii. Date of manufacture or packaging’ and ‘Expiry/Use by; 
 
iii. Best Before Date(optional); 
 
iv. Quantity (number of containers and total quantity of Natural Mineral Water in litre or milliliter), 
 
v. Type, material and capacity of containers 
 
 
C-4.3  Separate  samples  of  containers  need  not  be  drawn  during  market  surveillance  for  testing.  The 
possible tests on containers (including transparency) will be carried out on the containers of the samples of 
Natural Mineral Water drawn for testing requirements as per IS 13428 excluding PR and RAR. This shall 
be mentioned on the test request. 
C-4.4 The sample quantity to be sent to the third-party lab for testing is as follows: 
 
i) Natural Mineral Water 
For all parameters other than radioactive residues – A sample containing approximately 18 litres of 
Natural Mineral Water (NMW) in two parts is adequate, if packed in 1 liter or smaller containers but in 
case the  samples  are  available  in  large  size  packages,  minimum  two  such  packages  are  required  as 
microbiological laboratory needs separate sample for ensuring aseptic handling. For example: 
 
 
 
Capacity of the container 
Number of containers to be drawn 
(cup/bottle/jar) in litres 
 
1 18 
2 9 
5 4 
10 2 
20 2 
25 2 
 
For Pouches: 2 bags of 100 pouches each + Film. A sample of 4 bags shall be drawn in case each 
bag contains 50/60 pouches. 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
Annexure D 
 
Guidelines for actions in case of non-conformity including suspension and revocation of suspension 
of licence 
 
D-1.1 Guidelines for Suspension (SUS) and Revocation of Suspension (ROS) of Licence – For Scheme - I of 
Schedule - II  of  BIS  (Conformity  Assessment)  Regulations,  2018  issued  by  CMD-1  shall  apply  in  case  of 
Natural  Mineral  Water.  In  addition,  the  following  product  specific  guidelines  will  apply.  Wherever  the 
general and product-specific guidelines are in conflict, the product specific guidelines will take precedence. 
D-1.2 Non Conformity of Samples 
 
Non-conformity of containers/packaging material shall not be treated at par with non-conformity of 
Natural Mineral Water, since the criticality of the former is lower. Accordingly, non-conformity in 
case of Natural Mineral Water and containers/packaging material shall be treated separately as follows: 
D-1.2.1 Non-conformity of Natural Mineral Water (IS 13428) 
 
i) Suspension shall be imposed in the event of consecutive non-conformity of samples of Natural 
Mineral  Water.  However, suspension  shall  be  imposed  on  first  non-conformity  itself if  the 
non-conformity of Natural Mineral Water is in respect of parameters concerning radioactive 
residues or pesticide residue or toxicity. 
 
ii) For other situations, in case of first non-conformity, the non-conformity shall be 
communicated  to  the  licensee  through  email/speed  post/IT  software  with  a  copy  of  the  test 
report (as per template given in Annex I of SUS/ROS guidelines). The licensee shall be advised 
to take corrective action and submit reply with supporting evidence, as applicable, within 30 
days (one month) of the date of communication. 
 
iii) When the corrective actions as mentioned at para ii above, are received within 30 days (one 
month), the DO shall put up the case to the Head BO for nominating an officer for verification 
of the corrective actions preferably within 90 days through a surveillance inspection. 
 
iv) If during the surveillance inspection, the sample is non-conforming in factory testing, it shall 
be  treated  as  consecutive  non-conformity and  suspension  shall  be  imposed  and  actions  for 
communication of suspension as per para 10 of SUS/ROS guidelines shall be taken. 
 
v) However, if corrective actions as mentioned at para ii are not received within 30 days (one 
month), the case may be processed for imposition of suspension. 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
D-1.2.2 Non-conformity of container or packaging material (IS 15410 etc) 
 
i) First non-conformity 
 
a) For containers/packaging material, in case of first non-conformity, the non-conformity 
shall be communicated to the licensee through email/speed post/IT software with a copy 
of the test report (as per template given in Annex I of SUS/ROS guidelines). The licensee 
shall be advised to take corrective action and submit reply with supporting evidence, as 
applicable, within 30 days (one month) of the date of communication and offer improved 
samples for testing. 
 
b) When the corrective actions as mentioned at para (a) above, are received within 30 days 
(one month), the DO shall put up the case to the Head BO for nominating an officer for 
verification  of  the  corrective  actions  preferably  within  90  days  through  a  surveillance 
inspection. 
 
c) Since factory testing of containers during surveillance visit may not be feasible in most 
cases  as  most  manufacturers  are  procuring  containers  from  outside  and  do  not  have  in- 
house testing facilities, the corrective action shall be verified from documents etc as far as 
possible and improved sample of container shall be drawn for testing for all requirements 
of the standard (i.e. IS 15410) in third party lab during surveillance visit. 
 
 
ii) Second non-conformity (First consecutive non-conformity) 
 
a) Non-conformity  is  to be  considered  as  consecutive  in  case  of  containers  only  when  the 
same variety of containers (i.e. the same material, type/form and capacity) is found to be 
non-conforming  consecutively  and  hence  suspension  shall  not  be  imposed  in  the  first 
instance of consecutive non conformity in case of container. The non-conformity shall 
be communicated to the licensee through email/speed post/IT software with a copy of 
the test report (as per template  given in Annex  I of SUS/ROS guidelines). The licensee 
shall be advised to take corrective action and submit reply with supporting evidence, as 
applicable, within 30 days (one month) of the date of communication and offer improved 
samples for testing. 
 
b) When the corrective actions as mentioned at para (a) above, are received within 30 days 
(one month), the DO shall put up the case to the Head BO for nominating an officer for 
verification  of  the  corrective  actions  preferably  within  90  days  through  a  surveillance 
inspection. 
 
c) Since factory testing of containers during surveillance visit may not be feasible in most 
cases  as  most  manufacturers  are  procuring  containers  from  outside  and  do  not  have  in- 
house testing facilities, the corrective action shall be verified from documents etc as far as 
possible and improved sample of container shall be drawn for testing for all requirements 
of the standard (i.e. IS 15410) in third party lab during surveillance visit. 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
iii) Third non-conformity (Second Consecutive Non-Conformity) 
 
 
Suspension shall be imposed in case of second instance of consecutive non-conformity of the same 
variety  of  containers  i.e.  third  consecutive  non-conformity  of  same  variety  of container and 
actions for communication of suspension as per para 10 of SUS/ROS guidelines shall be taken. 
 
 
iv) Suspension shall also be imposed in case improved sample offered after second non 
conformity (first  consecutive  non-conformity)  fails  in  factory  or  independent  testing  or  if 
licensee  fails  to confirm corrective  actions  within 30 or days  and/or offer improved  sample 
during  the  visit,  and  actions  for  communication  of  suspension  as  per  para  10  of  SUS/ROS 
guidelines shall be taken 
 
v) Revocation of suspension shall be done as per the general Guidelines for Suspension (SUS) 
and Revocation of Suspension (ROS) of Licence. 
 
D-2 Unsatisfactory performance 
 
D-2.1 In case the following situations are observed, it shall be treated as major modification in process 
without prior evaluation of the Bureau and shall attract suspension on the first instance itself: 
i) Change of source of raw water without evaluation of the Bureau. 
 
ii) Modification  in  the process with or without any  change in raw water source, without prior 
evaluation  of the Bureau.  (Any  addition or deletion of processing  machinery  eg. Tanks/Filling 
machine, etc for capacity enhancement or otherwise, which does not change the overall manufacturing 
process, will not constitute as modification in the  process. A declaration regarding the same may be 
taken during surveillance in Form-I.) 
 
 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
Annexure E 
 
LIST OF TEST FACILITES 
 
A-ORGANOLEPTIC AND PHYSICAL REQURIMENTS 
 
SI. 
Tests 
Clause Ref. of Referred Method of 
Test /Equipment /Apparatus Chemical/Regents 
No. IS 13428:2005 
 
Tests & 
  
Limit of Detection 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1. Colour 
6.2, Sl No. i) of IS 3025 (Part 4) 
 
• Potassium chloroplatinate 
Table 1 
   
• Cobaltous chloride, 
 
i) Platinum 
  
crystalline 
  
cobalt (Visual Nessler cylinders,50 ml • Conc. Hydrochloric acid 
  
Comparison Centrifuge or filter assembly, functional • Distilled water 
  
method) pore size 0.45μm 
  
   
ii) Spectrophoto- • Spectrophotometer,400-700 nm with • Conc. Sulphuric acid 
 
metric method 
 
10 mm absorption cell 
  
  
• Filteration system consisting of • Sodium hydroxide 
   
filteration flask with side tubes. 
  
  
• Crucible holder 
  
  
• Micrometallic filter crucible, pore 40 
  
   
μm 
  
  
• Calcined filter aid (Celite 505 or 
  
   
equivalent 
  
  
• Vacuum system 
  
  
• Refrigerator (recommended) 
  
  
• pH meter 
  
  
• Centrifuge 
  
2. 
Odour 
6.2, SI No, ii) of 
IS 3025 (P 5 ) 
• Wide mouth glass stoppered bottles • Odour free distilled water (or 
Table 1 
 
(approx.1 lit . capacity) 
 
distilled water and column of 
    
granulated activated carbon) 
    
• Hydrochloric acid 
3. Taste 
6.2, Sl. No. iii) 
IS 3025 (P 8) 
Breaker (50ml) Taste and Odour free water 
of table 1 Water bath 2000 mg/l solution of sodium 
 
Thermometer chloride 
4. Turbidity 
6.2, Sl. No. iv) 
IS 3025 (P 10) 
• Sample tubes • Distilled water 
of Table 1 
• Turbidity meter 
• 
Hexamethylene Tetramine 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
• Volumetric flasks (100 ml) • Hydrazine sulphate 
• Membrane filter with pore size not more 
  
than 0.45 μm 
  
5. 
Total 6.2, Sl No. v) of 
IS 3025 (P 16) 
• Filter: 
 
dissolved Table 1 • Filtering Assembly (suitable for type of 
solids 
 
filter selected) 
  
• Drying oven (180 ± 2 ̊C) 
  
• Desiccator 
  
• Analytical balance (200 g capacity, LC 
  
0.1 mg) 
  
• Pipettes 
  
• Evaporating dish 
  
• Magnetic stirrer, recommended 
  
• Conductivity meter. 
6 pH 
6.2, Sl No. vi) of 
IS 3025 (P 11) 
• pH meter – with glass and reference • Standard pH Buffer 
Table 1 
 
electrode (saturated calomel) l.c 0.1 
 
solutions/tablets (Buffer 
 
• Magnetic stirrer with poly tetra fluoro 
 
tablets pH 4, pH 7, pH 
  
ethylene coated stirring bar 
 
9.2) (Minimum two different 
 
• Thermometer (l.c. 0.5°C 
 
values) 
 
• Beakers OR 
   
• Distilled water 
   
• Borax (for Borax buffer) 
   
• Potassium dihydrogen 
    
phosphate, Sodium hydrogen 
    
phosphate and oven (for 
    
phosphate buffer) 
   
• Potassium hydrogen tartarate 
    
(for Tartarate buffer) 
    
Potassium hydrogen 
    
phthalate (for Phthalate 
    
buffer) Potassium 
    
tetraoxalate dihydrate (for 
    
Calcium hydroxide buffer) 
   
• Calcium Carbonate 
   
• Platinum dish, 
   
• Muffle furnace, 
   
• Hot Plate, 
   
• Fritted glass filter of medium 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
    
porosity, polyethylene bottle, 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Suction pump & fritted glass 
funnel (for Tetra oxalate 
buffer) 
 
• Methyl orange, methyl red, 
bromothymol blue, 
phenolphthalein and 
alcohol (66%) (for 
universal indicator) 
• Thymol blue indicator 
(acid range) Bromophenol 
blue indicator 
• Bromocresol green indicator 
Methyl red indicator 
• Bromocresol purple indicator 
Bromothymol blue indicator 
Phenol Red indicator 
• Cresol Red indicator 
• Thymol Blue (alkali 
range) indicator 
• Thymolphthalein indicator 
• Thymol violet indicator 
• Different buffer solutions 
of known pH 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
B - CHEMICAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
 
 
SI. 
Tests 
Clause Ref. Referred Method of 
Test /Equipment /Apparatus* Chemical/Regents 
No. of IS Tests & 
 
13428:2005 Limit of Detection 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1. 
Nitrate (as 6.2, Sl. No. i) 
IS 3025 (Part 34) 
  
NO3) of Table 2 
   
i) Cadmium Reduction • Reduction Column • Distilled water 
Method • Colorimeter OR • Nitrate free water 
 
• Spectrophotometer OR • Cadmium granules (40 – 60 mesh) 
Detection limit • 
Filter photometer Glass wool 
• 
Hydrochloric Acid (6N) 
maximum 0.1 mg/l • 0.45 μm pore diameter membrane • Copper Sulphate Solution 
  
filter • Sulphanilamide 
 
Refrigerator • Conc. Hydrochloric Acid 
  
• N-(1-napthyl))-Ethylenediamine 
   
dihydrochloride (NED) 
   
Dihydrochloride) 
  
• Ammonium Chloride 
  
• Disodium Ethylene diamine tetra acetate 
  
• Ammonia Solution 
  
• Copper sulphate Solution – 2% Stock 
   
nitrate solution – 100μg/ml 
  
• (Potassium Nitrate & Chloroform) 
  
• Chloroform 
  
• Stock nitrite solution - 100μg/ml 
  
• (Potassium Nitrite & Chloroform) 
   
Nitrite free water 
   
 
ii) Chromotropic 
 
• 
 
Spectrophotometer 
 
• Nitrate free water 
Acid Method • Standard laboratory glasswares • Stock Nitrate Solution - 100μg/ml 
   
(Potassium Nitrate, Chloroform) 
   
• Standard Nitrate solution – 10.0μg/ml 
   
• 
Sulphite Urea Reagent 
    
(Urea & Anhydrous sodium Sulphite) 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
     
• Antimony reagent (Antimony 
 
metal, Conc. Sulphuric acid) 
• Chromotropic Acid Reagent 
 
(Purified chromotropic Acid 
 
crystals, Conc. Sulphuric Acid) 
 
Sulphuric Acid, Conc. Nitrate free 
   
iii) Devarda’s Alloy • 
Distillation Assembly (Kjeldahl 
• 
Ammonia Free Water 
 
Reduction 
 
Assembly) 
• 
Borate Buffer Solution (0.1N Sodium 
 
Method 
   
Hydroxide, 0.025M Sodium 
• Measuring Scoop spectrophotometer 
 
Tetraborate) 
   
• Sodium Hydroxide – 6 N 
Detection limit 
  
• Devarda’s Alloy – 20 mesh with less 
minimum 2 mg/l 
   
than 0.005 percent Nitrogen 
   
• 
Mixed indicator Solution (Methyl Red 
    
indicator, Ethyl alcohol/Isopropyl 
    
alcohol, Methylene Blue) 
   
• 
Indicating Boric Acid Solution 
    
(Hydroboric Acid, mixed indicator 
    
solution) 
   
• Std. Sulphuric Acid Titrant - 0.02 N 
   
• Nessler’s Reagent (Mercuric Iodide, 
    
Potassium Iodine. Sodium Hydroxide) 
   
• Stock Ammonia Solution -1.22mg 
    
ammonia/ ml (Anhydrous Ammonium 
    
ammonia/ ml (Anhydrous Ammonium 
    
Chloride) 
   
• 
Standard Ammonia Solution 
2 Nitrite 
6.2, Sl. No. 
IS 3025(Part 34) 
 
• Spectrophotometer / Photometer • Nitrite Free water (Distilled water, 
ii) of Table 2 
  
OR 
 
Hydroxide/Calcium Hydroxide Conc. 
  
• Nessler’s cylinders method 
 
Sulphuric Acid, Manganese Sulphate) 
  
• Nessler’s Tubes • Sulphanilamide Reagent 
  
• 0.45 μm Membrane Filter • NED Dihydrochloride 
  
Distillation Assembly (borosilicate) • Hydrochloric Acid 
   
• Sodium Oxalate – 0.05 N. 
   
• Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate – 0.05N 
    
(Ferrous Ammonium Sulphate, Conc. 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
     
Sulphuric Acid, Std. Dichromate 
solution) 
• Stock Nitrite Solution - 250μg of 
nitrogen/ml (Sodium Nitrite, 
Chloroform, Sodium Oxalate, Std., 
Potassium Permanganate solution) 
• Intermediate Nitrite Solution – 50.0μg/ml 
Standard Nitrite Solution – 0.500μg/ml 
3 Sulphide 
6.2, Sl. No. IS 3025 (Part 29) • Glass Fibre Filter Paper. • Zinc acetate solution – 2N 
iii) of Table 2 
 
• Reaction Flask (1 lit capacity with 2 • Sulphuric Acid, Conc. 
 
i) Iodometric Method hole stopper fitted with gas-diffusion • Standard Iodine solution – 0.025 N 
 
Detection limit 
tube. • (Potassium Iodide, Iodine) Hydrochloric 
 
• Absorption flasks (250ml Capacity) Acid, Conc. Standard Thiosulphate 
 
above 1 mg/l (2 No’s) Solution - 0.025 N (Sodium 
  
• Nitrogen/Carbon dioxide gas thiosulphate, Sodium 
  
cylinder Or Carbon dioxide gas 
Hydroxide/Chloroform) 
  
generator • Starch indicator solution (Starch, 
   
salicylic acid, toluene) 
   
• Aluminium Chloride solution – 6N 
   
• Sodium hydroxide – 6N 
   
ii) Methylene blue • Spectrophotometer (664 nm) or • N, N-dimethyl-p-Phenylene Diamine 
Method filterphotometer (600 nm). oxalate 
 
• Matched test tubes • Sulphuric Acid, Conc. & 1:1 solution 
Detection limit upto • Droppers • Ferric Chloride 
20 mg/l • Dark glass bottle. • Diammonium Hydrogen Phosphate 
  
• Methylene Blue 
  
• Standard Sulphide Solution 
  
• Zinc acetate 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Manganese 
6.2, SI. No. i) IS 3025 (Part 59) 
• 
Nessler’s Tubes 
• 
Sulphuric Acid 
iv) Table 2 
 
• Beakers • Hydrogen Peroxide (30%) 
 
a) Periodate • Hot Plate • Nitric Acid, Conc. 
 
Colorimetric 
• 
Volumetric flask 
• 
Stabilized Distilled Water OR 
 
Method • Pipettes • Distillation Assembly, OR 
 
Detection limit up to 
• Conical Flasks • Distilled water, 
 
• Burette • Potassium Permanganate and 
 
0.2mg/l 
   
• Dil Sulphuric Acid 
    
• Phosphoric Acid (sp. Gr. 1.75) 
    
• Potassium Periodate 
    
• Std. Manganese Solution 
    
( 1ml=0.02 mg of Mn) (Standard 0.1 N 
     
Potassium Permanganate solution, 
     
saturated solution of sulphur dioxide) 
   
b) Formaldoxime 
  
• Fluoride Free Water 
   
• Potassium Peroxodisulphate or Sodium 
Spectrometric • Spectrophotometer 
 
Peroxodisulphate 
Method 
• Glass Bottle • EDTA Tetrasodium Salt, Solution, 
  
Autoclave 
 
c(EDTA) 
Detection limit 
  
• Sodium Hydroxide 
between 0.01mg/l to 5 
  
• Hydroxyl ammonium Chloride 
mg/l 
  
• Formaldehyde 
   
• Ammonia Solution 
   
• Ammonium Iron (II) Sulphate 
    
Hexahydrate Solution 
   
• Sulphuric Acid, conc. 
    
Manganese Monohydrate (for Standard 
    
Mn Solution) 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
IS 3025 (Part 2) 
 
• 
 
Induction Coupled Plasma-Atomic 
 
• 
 
Nitric Acid 
 
Emission Spectrometer 
• 
Hydrogen Peroxide 
• Sample Bottles • Sulphuric Acid 
• 
Glasswares 
• 
Hydrochloric acid 
• Acid Dispensers • Ammonium Sulfate 
• 
Membrane Filtration Equipment and • Stock Solution of Iron 
 
• 
A 
Filters (0.45μ) 
Hot Plate 
rgon gas 
 
5 
Copper 
 
 
IS 3025 (Part 2) 
 
• 
 
Induction Coupled Plasma-Atomic 
 
• 
 
Nitric Acid 
  
Emission Spectrometer • Hydrogen Peroxide 
 
• Sample Bottles • Sulphuric Acid 
 
• Glasswares • Hydrochloric acid 
 
• Acid Dispensers • Ammonium Sulfate 
 
• 
Membrane Filtration Equipment and • Stock Solution of Iron 
  
Filters (0.45μ) 
 
 
• Hot Plate 
 
 
6.2, Sl No. 
Argon gas 
 
v) of Table 2 
  
   
a) Neocuproine 
• Spectrophotometer & 1cm cell Hot 
• Ammonium Hydroxide 
Method • Chloroform, AR Grade 
 
plate 
Detection range 0.05 • 
Hydrochloric acid, Conc. 
• Separating funnels (125 ml) 
to 5.0mg/l • 
Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride 
• 
Conical flasks 
 
• 
Isopropyl Alcohol 
   
• 
Neocuproine 
   
• 
Double Distilled water 
   
• 
Nitric Acid, Conc. 
   
• Sulphuric Acid, Conc. 
   
• Hydrated Sodium Citrate 
   
• Stock copper (II) solution 200μg/ml 
   
(Pure Copper Metal, hot plate) 
   
• Hydrogen Peroxide 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
b) Atomic Abso- 
 
• 
Hydrochloric Acid, Conc 
 
rption Method 
 
• Nitric Acid, Conc. 
 
(Direct) 
 
• Dilute Sulphuric Acid 
Detection range 0.02 to • Atomic Absorption Spectro- photometer • Stock copper (II) solution – 1.0mg/ml 
5.0mg/l 
 
with air-acetylene flame & Copper • (Pure Copper metal & hot plate) 
  
Hollow Cathode lamp 
  
   
c) Atomic 
    
 
Absorption 
  
• Hydrochloric Acid, Conc. 
 
Method 
  
• Nitric Acid, Conc. 
 
(Chelation 
  
• Pyrrolidine 
 
Extraction) 
• Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer • Dithiocarbamic acid 
Detection range 0.02 to 
 
with air-acetylene flame 
• Methyl Isobutyl Ketone, AR grade 
5.0mg/l 
• Carbon Disulphide 
• Copper Hollow Cathode 
 
• 
Sodium Hydroxide 
  
Lamp Separating Funnel 
 
• Volumetric Flasks 
• Distilled water 
 
• Water Standard MIBK 
 
• 
Distillation Assembly 
 
• Bromophenol Blue 
   
• Ethanol or Isopropanol 
   
• Stock copper (II) solution – 1.0mg/ml 
   • (Pure Copper metal & hot plate) 
   
d) Differential Pulse • Polarograph capable of 
• Hydrochloric Acid Conc. (Spectro 
 
Anodic Stripping 
 
Performing differential 
 
Grade) 
 
Voltametry 
 
pulse work • Nitric Acid-Conc. (Spectro Grade) 
Detection range 0.01 • Hanging Mercury Drop 
• Sulphuric Acid Conc. 
to 
  
electrode • Pure Copper Metal 
0.1mg/l 
• 
Platinum Counter • Granular Zinc 
  
Electrode • Mercury 
 
• Saturated Calomel Reference 
 
  
Electrode 
 
 
• 
Magnetic Stirrer 
 
 
• Control unit with Stirring Bar 
 
 
• Scrubber Assembly 
 
 
• 
Whatman Filter Paper 
 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
  
No. 40 
 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
    
• 
Nitrogen Gas 
 
    
i) IS 3025 
• Induction Coupled Plasma-Atomic • Nitric Acid 
 
Emission Spectrometer • Hydrogen Peroxide 
  
(Part 2) 
  
• Sample Bottles • Sulphuric Acid 
   
• Glasswares • Hydrochloric acid 
   
• Acid Dispensers • Ammonium Sulfate 
   
• Membrane Filtration Equipment and 
• Stock Solution of Copper 
    
Filters 
 
   
(0.45μ) 
  
   
• Hot Plate 
  
   
• Argon Gas 
 
6. Flouride 
6.2, Sl. No. IS 3025(Part 60) 
   
vii) of Table i) 
 
Zirconium • Nessler Tubes (100ml)Distillation • Thiosulphate Solution (0.1 N) 
2 
  
alizarin 
 
Apparatus 
 
• Standard Sodium Fluoride Solution 
 
• Refrigerator (Recommended) 
 
(1ml = 0.01 mg F) 
 
  
Method 
 
Heating mantle • Zirconium Oxychloride OR Zirconium 
    
Oxynitrate 
 
Detection range 
 
• 
Alizarin Sodium Monosulphonate 
 
0.05 to 1.0 mg/l 
  
(AlizarinS) 
  
• Conc. Hydrochloric Acid 
   
• Conc. Sulphuric Acid 
   
• Silver Sulphate 
   
• Perchloric Acid 
   
• Phenolphthalein Indicator 
   
• Sodium Hydroxide Solution 
   
ii) Electro Chemical • Millivolt Meter • Sodium Hydroxide- 5 M 
 
Probe Method • Fluoride Ion – Selective Electrode • Total Ionic Strength Adjustment Buffer 
 
Detection range 
• Reference Electrode – Either a 
 
(TISAB)-[Sodium Chloride, Glacial 
 
 
calomel electrode, 
 
Acetic Acid, Sodium Hydroxide, 
 
0.2mg to 2.0 g/l 
  
filled with saturated Potassium 
 
CDTA( trans -1,2- diaminocyclohexane 
   
Chloride (KCl) Solution or a Silver / 
 
– N,N,N’,N’ tetra acetic acid)] 
   
Silver Chloride Electrode 
  
  
• Measuring Cells – • Fluoride, Stock Solution, 1000mg/1 
   
100ml(Polypropylene fitted with 
 
(Sodium Fluoride ) 
   
thermostated jacket) 
  
  
• Water Bath 
  
  
• Magnetic Stirrer with a 
  
   
polytetrafluoroethylene(PTFE) 
  

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
    
• Polyethylene Beaker 
• pH meter 
• Standard Volumetric 
• Glasswares 
• Desiccator 
• Screw Capped Polyethylene Container 
• Plastic Bottle 
Note : 
• Purity of the reagent – Unless specified 
otherwise, only pure chemicals & Fluoride 
free distilled water shall be used in tests. 
7. 
Barium 
6.2, Sl. No i) 
of Table 2 
i) Annex G of IS 
13428 
Filter paper and filtration assembly 
Hot plate/gas burner 
• Ammonium Dichromate 
• Ammonium Acetate 
• Ammonium Hydroxide 
• Potassium Iodide 
• Sodium Thiosulphate(0.1N) 
• Hydrochloric Acid 
• Ammonium Chloride 
Starch indicator 
   
ii) IS 15302 • Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer 
and 
• Associated equipment (Burner, 
Readout mechanism, lamp for Barium, 
Pressure Reducing valves and vents) 
• Nitrous oxide burner head 
• T-junction valve or other switching 
valve 
• Air 
• Acetylene Gas 
Nitrous oxide gas 
• Metal free water 
• Hydrochloric Acid 
• Nitric Acid 
• Sulphuric Acid 
• Hydroflouric Acid 
• Potassium Chloride 
• Standard barium solution 100μg/ml 
(Barium chloride, oven, hydrochloric 
acid) 
   
iii) IS 3025 (P 2) 
• Induction Coupled Plasma-Atomic 
Emission 
• Spectrometer 
• Sample Bottles 
• Glasswares 
• Acid Dispensers 
• Nitric Acid 
• Hydrogen Peroxide 
• Sulphuric Acid 
• Hydrochloric acid 
• Ammonium Sulfate 
Stock Solution of Barium 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
    
• Membrane Filtration Equipment and 
 
 
Filters 
(0.45μ) 
• Hot Plate 
 
Argon Gas 
8. Antimony 
6.2 Sl. No. i) Annex H of IS 13428 • Spectrophotometer (565 nm) • Hydrochloric Acid – 6 N 
ix) of Table 2 
 
• Erlenmeyer Flask (125ml) • Phosphoric Acid – 3N 
 
Spectrophoto-metric 
• Separating Funnels (125 ml) with • Rhodamine B 
 
Method 
 
Teflon • Antimony Standard 
  
• Stopcocks • Solution (100 μg/ml and 1 ug/ml (pure 
  
• Refrigerator antimony, sulphuric acid) 
  
• Ice Bath • Benzene 
  
• Test Tubes 
• Sulphuric Acid 
  
• Perchloric Acid 
   
Pipettes 
   
ii) IS 15303 • Atomic Absorption Spectrometer • Metal free Water 
  
with • Hydrochloric Acid, Conc. 
Electrothermal Atomic 
 
• Nitric Acid, Conc. 
Absorption • Hollow Cathode Lamp OR • Matrix Modifier Stock Solutions 
Spectrometric Method 
• Electrodeless discharge lamp (EDL). (Magnesium Nitrate, Nickel Nitrate, 
 
• Graphic Furnace Phosophoric Acid, Palladium Nitrate, 
 
• Readout Mechanism Citric Acid) 
 
• Microlitre Pipettes-5 to 100 μl. OR 
• Stock Metal Solution 
 
• Antimony Solutions (100 μg/m Sb) 
 
• Automatic sampling device designed 
 
• Iron-100μg Fe 
 
 
for the specific instrument.  
• Selenam-1.00 mg Sb 
 
• Vent for Fumes 
 
• Chelating Resin 
 
• Cooling Device  
Sodium hydroxide -10 N 
  
Membrance Filter Apparatus (0.45μm) 
  
or smaller pore diameter membrane 
 
  
filters. 
 
9. Borate 
6.2, Sl. No. 
Annex J of IS13428 
• Spectrometer (410 – 420nm) • Azomethine – H, Sodium Salt 
x) of Table 2 • Lab Apparatus made of • L - Ascorbic Acid 
  
Polypropylene/Polyethylene/Polytetra • Buffer Solution (pH 5.9) [Ammonium 
  
fluoro Ethylene Acetate, Sulphuric Acid, Phosphoric 
  
Refrigerator Acid, Citric Acid, Disodium Ethylene 
   
diamine – Tetraacetic Acid Dihydrate] 
   
• Borate Stock Solution - (1mg/ml) (Boric 
   
Acid) 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
     
• Boron Standard Solution - 10μg/ml 
 
Calcium Hydroxide 
10. Silver 
6.2, Sl. No. 
Annex K of IS 13428 
• Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer • Deionised Distilled Water (Ion 
xi) of Table 2 with Oxidizing Air Acetylene Flame 
 
Exchange Column & Distilled Water) 
  
• Nitric Acid – Redistilled 
  
• Hydrochloric Acid – Redistilled 
  
• Silver Std. Solution (Silver Nitrate) 
  
• Lanthanum Chloride 
  
• Lanthanum Stock Solution (Lanthanum 
   
Oxide, Hydrochloric Acid) 
  
• Ammonium Pyrrolidine 
   
Dithiocarbamate solution) 
  
• 
Methyl isobutyl ketone 
11. Chloride 
6.2, Sl. No IS 3025 (Part 32) • Erlenmeyer Flask (250ml) • Potassium Chromate Indicator Solution 
.xii) of Table 
   
(Potassium Chromate, Silver Nitrate) 
2 
i) Argentometric 
Burette • Standard Silver Nitrate Solution – 
  
 
0.01 N (silver nitrate, sodium 
 
Method 
 
   
chloride) 
   
• Standard Sodium Chloride Solution – 
    
0.01 N (Sodium Chloride) 
   
• Aluminium Hydroxide Suspension 
    
(Aluminium Potassium Sulphate or 
    
Aluminium Ammonium Sulphate, 
    
Conc Ammonium Hydroxide) 
   
• Phenolphthalein Indicator 
    
Solution 
   
• Sodium Hydroxide – 1N 
   
• Sulphuric Acid – 1N 
   
Hydrogen Peroxide – 30% 
   
 
ii) Mercuric Nitrate 
 
• Erlenmeyer Flask (250 ml) 
 
• Standard Sodium Chloride 
Method 
• Microburette (5 ml with l.c. 0.01ml) 
 
Solution, 0.01N 
• Refrigerator • Nitric Acid, 0.1N 
 • pH meter • Sodium Hydroxide, 0.1N 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
     • Indicator – Acidifier Reagent (S- 
Diphenyl- carbazone, Conc. Nitric 
Acid, Xylene Cyanol FF, Ethyl 
Alcohol or Isopropyl Alcohol) 
• Standard Mercuric Nitrate Solution, 
0.01N (Mercuric Nitrate, Conc. Nitric 
Acid, Sodium Bicarbonate, Std. Sodium 
Chloride Solution) 
• Mixed Indicator Reagent 
(Diphenylcarbazone, Bromo Phenol 
Blue, Ethyl Alcohol or Isopropyl 
Alcohol) 
• Standard Mercuric Nitrate Solution – 
0.1N 
   
iii) Potentiometric • Glass and Silver- Silver Chloride • Standard Sodium Chloride Solution 
Method Electrodes (0.01N) 
  
• Nitric Acid-Conc 
 
• Electronic Voltmeter • Standard Silver Nitrate Solution (0.01N) 
  
• Pretreatment Reagent (Sulphuric Acid, 
 
• Mechanical Stirrer Hydrogen Peroxide, Sodium Hydroxide 
 
• –1N) 
  • 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
   
iv) Automated 
• Automated Analytical Equipment • Stock Mercuric Thiocyanate Solution 
Ferricyanide Method 
 
(Mercuric Thiocynate, Methanol) 
 
Filters (480nm) • Stock Ferric Nitrate Solution (Ferric 
  
Nitrate, Conc. Nitric Acid) 
  
• Colour Reagent (Poly oxy Ethylene 23 
  
Lauryl Ether) 
  
Sodium Chloride 
12 Sulphate 
6.2, Sl. No. IS 3025 (Part 24) 
  
xiii) of Table 
   
2 
  
• Steam Bath 
 
• Methyl Red Indicator 
 
i)Gravimetric Method • Drying Oven (thermostatically • Hydrochloric Acid 
  
controlled) • Barium Chloride 
 
Detection limit more • Muffle Furnace • Silver Nitrate 
 
than 10mg/l • Desiccator • Nitric Acid 
  
• Analytical Balance (l.c.0.1mg) • Ion Exchange Resin (Amberlite IR-120 
  
• Filter Paper (Preferably Whatman or Equivalent) 
  
No.42) 
 
  
• Silica or Porcelain Crucible (max pore 
 
  
size of 5 microns) 
 
  
• Ion Exchange Column 
 
  
• Filter (0.45 μ m) 
 
  
• Platinum Dish 
 
   
ii) Thorin Method • White Porcelain Basin • Ethyl Alcohol 
 
• Burette • Ammonium Hydroxide (Ammonia-Conc 
Detection range 5 to • Ion Exchange Column and Distilled Water) 
150mg/l • Filter – 0.45μm • Hydrochloric Acid 
  
• Thorin (2,2 – Hydroxy – 3,6 – Disulpho 
  
– 1 – Naphthylazo Benzene Arsenic 
  
Acid) 
  
• Ion Exchange Resin (Amberlite IR-120 
  
or Equivalent) 
  
• Stock Sulphate Solution – 100 mg/l 
  • (Anhydrous Sodium Sulphate) 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
   
iii) Turbidity • Turbidity Meter or • Barium Chloride – Standard Solution 
 
Method Spectrophotometer`(420nm) (Barium chloride in hydrochloric acid 
 
• Glass Apparatus ammonia) 
Detection limit 1 to • Hot Plate • Barium Chloride 
40mg/l • Refrigerator (recommended) • Gelatin Powder 
 
Filter – 0.45μm • Glycerol 
  
• Hydrochloric Acid, Conc 
  
• Sodium Chloride 
  
• Ethyl or Isopropyl Alcohol 
  
• Anhydrous Sodium Sulphate 
  • Stock sulphate solution – 100mg/l 
13. Magnesium 
6.2, Sl No. i) IS 3025 (Part 46) • Vacuum Pump • Methyl Red Indicator 
xiv) of Table 
 
• Filter Flasks • Hydrochloric Acid 
2 a)Gravimetric Method • Filter Crucibles (medium porosity, • Ammonium Oxalate 
  
30 ml) 
• Ammonium Hydroxide 
 
Detection limit more • Nitric Acid, Conc 
 
• Muffle Furnace 
 
than 1 mg/l 
• Diammonium Hydrogen Phosphate 
 
• Hot plate 
  
• Urea 
  
• Volumetric Flasks 
  
• Glasswares 
 
   
b)Volumetric Method • Hot plate • Indicator Solutions 
(EDTA) • Volumetric Flasks i)Patton and Reeder Reagent, 
 
• Glasswares Sodium Chloride/Potassium 
 
• Chloride 
  
ii) Murexide (Ammonium Purpurate), 
  
Absolute Ethylene Glycol, Sodium 
  
Chloride 
  
iii) Eriochrome Black T Indicator (EBT 
  
Indicator), Hydroxylamine, Hydrochloride, 
  
Ethanol/Methanol 
  
• Standard Zinc Solution – 0.01M 
  
(Pure Zinc Dust/Granules – 99.9% 
  
Pure; Hydrochloric Acid) 
  
• Buffer Solution (Ammonium Chloride, 
  
Ammonia, Sodium Hydroxide-1N) 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
     • Standard Ethylene Diamine Tetra 
Acetic Acid (EDTA) Solution – 
0.001M (Disodium Ethylene Diamine 
Tetra Acetate Dihydrate, Standard 
Zinc Solution) 
• Triethanolamine Solution – 
10% Potassium Cyanide 
• Hydroxlamine Hydrochloride 
   
c) Atomic Absorption • Atomic Absorption • Hydrochloric Acid – 1N and 0.1N 
Method Spectrophotometer ( 285.2 nm ) with • Lanthanum Chloride (Lathanum 
 
Air-Acetylene Flame or Nitrous Oxide, Hydrochloric Acid, Conc) 
Detection limit max 5 Oxide-Acetylene Flame and Hollow • Cesium Chloride 
 
mg/l Cathode Lamp (Magnesium) Standard Magnesium Solution (1000mg/l) 
  • Polyethylene Bottles (Magnesium Oxide, Hydrochloric Acid) 
   
i) IS 3025(Part 2) ICP AES (279.079nm) including - • Nitric Acid 
 
computer controlled aes with • Hydrogen Peroxide 
Inductively Coupled background correction radio frequency • Sulphuric Acid 
Plasma Atomic 
generator argon gas supply ( welding • Hydrochloric Acid 
Emission Spectroscopy grade or better) • Ammonium Sulphate 
  
• Distilled Water 
Detection limit • Sample bottles • Magnesium Stock solution ( 10 mg/l ) 
0.03 mg/l 
• Glassware ( beakers, filter funnels, 
 
 
• volumetric flasks, pipettes) acid 
 
 
dispensers 
 
 
• Membrane filtration equipment 
 
14 Calcium 
6.2 Sl. No. i) IS 3025 (Part 40) 
 
• Sodium Hydroxide Solution – 1N 
xv) of Table 
  
• Hydrochloric Acid – 0.1N 
2 
  
• Indicator Solution:Murexide 
 
a)EDTA Titrimetric 
 
(Ammonium Purpurate) Indicator, 
 
Method • Hot Plate Absolute Ethylene Glycol 
  
• Glassware • Sodium Chloride 
  
• Polyethylene Bottle OR 
   
• Patton and Reeder’s Indicator 
  
 (Eriochrome Blue Black R, Sodium 
   
Sulphate/Potassium Sulphate) 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
     
• Standard EDTA Solution – 0.01M 
(Disodium Ethylene Diamine Tetra – 
Acetate, Standard Zinc Solution, (Or 
Standard Calcium Solution) Buffer 
Solution, Eriochrome Black T Indicator 
Solution 
• Stock Calcium Solution (Calcium 
Carbonate, Hydrochloric Acid – 0.1N) 
• Nitric Acid, Conc 
• 
   
b)Atomic Absorption • Atomic Absorption Spectrometer • Hydrochloric Acid – 1N and 0.1N 
Spectrometric Method 
(422.7 nm ) with Air/Acetylene or • Lanthanum Chloride 
Detection limit 
Nitrous Oxide/Acetylene Flame and • Cesium Chloride 
Hollow Cathode Lamp (Calcium) 
• Standard Calcium Solution 
maximum 50mg/l 
   
c) Permanganate 
• Beakers, Cover Glass, and Glass • Hydrochloric Acid – 1N 
Titration Method Rod Filtration Set up (Gooch • Methyl Red Indicator Solution 
 
Crucible with Suction) 
• Ammonium Oxalate Solution 
 
Hot plate 
 
• Urea 
   
• Dilute Sulphuric Acid – 1N 
   
• Sodium Oxalate 
   
• Standard Potassium 
   
• Permanganate Solution (Potassium 
   
permanganate, sodium oxalate) 
   
ii) IS 3025(Part 2) • ICP AES ( 315.887 nm) including • Nitric Acid 
Inductively Coupled – 
 
• Hydrogen Peroxide 
Plasma Atomic 
• computer controlled a e s with • Sulphuric Acid 
Emission Spectroscopy background correction • Hydrochloric Acid 
(a e s) 
• radio frequency generator 
• Ammonium Sulphate 
Detection limit 
• argon gas supply ( welding grade 
• Distilled Water 
Calcium Stock solution ( 10 mg/l) 
0.1 mg/l or better) 
 
 
• Sample bottles 
 
 
• Glassware ( beakers, filter funnels, 
 
 
volumetric flasks, pipettes) 
 
 
• acid dispensers 
 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
    
• Membrane filtration equipment 
• Filter of pore size 0.45 microns 
 
 
15. Sodium 6.2, Sl No. 
xvi) of Table 
2 
i) IS 3025 (Part 45)  
a) Flame Emission 
Photometric Method 
anyone of the following 
applicable detection 
range:(0 to 1)mg/lit(1 
to 10)mg/lit (0 to 
100)mg/lit 
• Flame Photometer (Direct Reading 
OR Internal Standard Type) OR 
Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometer (In Flame 
Emission Mode) 
• Deionized Distilled Water 
• Stock Sodium Solution – 1mg/ml 
(Sodium Chloride) 
• Standard Lithium Solution – 1mg/ml 
   
 
b)Atomic Absorption 
• Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometer with Air- 
Acetylene Flame and Hollow 
Cathode Lamp (Sodium) 
• Glassware 
• Beakers (20ml, Borosilicate) 
• 
 
• Sodium Chloride 
Spectrometry Method • Potassium Chloride 
 
Detection range 0.20 
to 4.0mg/l 
• Stock Sodium Solution – 1mg/ml 
• Stock Potassium Solution – 1mg/ml 
   
c)Gravimetric Method • Fritted Glass Crucible or Porous • Zinc Uranyl Acetate Reagent (Glacial 
 
Porcelain Crucibles 
• Vacuum Pump or Aspirator 
• Filter paper 
• Pyrex bottle 
Stirring rod 
Conc. Acetic Acid, Uranyl Acetate 
Dihydrate, Zinc Acetate Dihydrate, 
Sodium Chloride) 
Ethyl Alcohol Wash Solution (Ethyl 
Alcohol, Pure Sodium Zinc Uranyl 
Acetate, Sodium Chloride, Acetic Acid, 
Diethyl Ether) 
   
ii) IS 3025(Part 2) 
• Oven 
• Membrane filtration equipment and 
filters(0.45μm) 
• Inductively coupled plasma atomic 
emission spectrometer; Computer 
controlled AAS with background 
correction, Radiofrequency 
Generator, Argon Gas 
supply(welding grade or better) 
• Nitric acid 
• Hydrogen peroxide 
• Sulphuric acid 
• Ammonium sulphate 
• Sodium Stock solution 
• 
 
• pH meter 
 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
    
• PTFE container 
 
• PTFE sample bottles(250 ml or 
500ml) 
• Acid dispensers, Variables 
• 
16. Alkalinity 
6.2, Sl. No. IS 3025 (Part 23) 
 
Distilled Water 
xvii) of Table 
 
• pH Meter • Sulphuric Acid, Conc 
2 
 
• Burette • Sulphuric Acid, 0.02 N 
 
i) Indicator Method • Magnetic Stirrer Assembly • Phenolphthalein Indicator 
  
• Beaker • Mixed Indicator Solution (Methyl Red, 
 
Detection 
 
• Bromocresol Green, Ethyl or Isoprophyl 
 
range 0. 5 to 
 
Alcohol) 
 
500mg/l 
 
   ii)Potentiometric • Potentiometer 
Standard Sulphuric Acid – 0.02N 
Method 
Glasswares 
Detection range 
 
0.5 to 500mg/l 
 
17. Selenium 
6.2, Sl. No. i) IS 3025 (Part 56) 
  
xviii) of a)Spectrophotometric 
  
Table 2 Method • Spectrophotometer (480nm,light path • Stock Selenium Solution – 1.0mg/ml 
  
of 1cm (Sodium Selenite, Hydrochloric Acid) 
 
(Diamino naphthalene • Volumetric Glasswares • Hydrochloric Acid – 0.1N 
 
Method) • Separating Funnel (250ml) Preferably • Ammonium Hydroxide,1:1Cyclohexane 
  
• Flourocarbon Stopcock • 2,3 – Diaminonaphthalene (DAN) 
 
Detection limit • Water Bath – Thermostatically • Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride 
 
minimum 0.01mg/l 
Controlled • Sodium Salt of EDTA 
  
• pH Meter • Amberlite XAD -8 or Equivalent Resin 
  
• Centrifuge • Hydrochloric Acid, Conc 
  
Centrifuge Bottles with Flourocarbon Potassium Hydroxide 
  
Screw Cap 
 
   b) Atomic absorption • Atomic Absorption Spectrometer • Nitric Acid 
Spectrometric Method (196.0 nm) Fitted with Hydride • Sulphuric Acid 
(Hydride Technique) System and Hollow Cathode • Hydrochloric Acid 
 
Lamp/Electrodeless Discharge Lamp 
• Hydrogen Peroxide 
 
• Gas (Argon or Nitrogen) • Sodium Hydroxide 
  
• Sodium Tetrahydro borate 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
    
• Glasswares Decomposition Apparatus • Selenium Stock Solution (1mg/ml) 
(Round Bottom Flask, Reflux (Selenium Dioxide) 
Condenser, Condensate Reservoir) 
 
18 Mineral Oil 
6.2, Sl No. Clause 6 of IS 3025 • Separating Funnel (1lit) with Teflon • Hydrochloric Acid 
xix) of Table (Part 39) or Equivalent Stopcock • Hexane 
2 
 
• Infra-Red Spectrophotometer – • Sodium Sulphate, Anhydrous 
 
Partition Infra-Red Double Beam, Recording type • Reference Oil (Iso-Octane, Hexadecane, 
 
Method 
• Cells – Infra-Red, Silica Benzene) 
 
Detection limit 0.5 to 
• Filter Paper – Whatman No.40 or • Trichlorotrifluoroethane 
 
Equivalent, 11cm Diameter 
 
 
100 mg/l 
 
 
Analytical Balance 
 
11                            19 
 
Phenolic 
compounds 
(as C
6
H
5
OH) 
55.3, Sl No. 
xix) of Table 2 
 Clause 6 of IS 3025 
(Part 43) 
 Spectrophotometer 
 pH Meter 
 Phenol Standard Solution 
 Glass distilling apparatus with 
Graham condenser 
 Water bath 
 Buchner funnels with fritted discs 
 Filter Paper – Whatman No.40 or 
equivalent 
 1000 ml capacity separating funnel 
with ground glass stoppered and 
TFE stop cock 
 Ferrous Sulphate 
 Phosphoric Acid 
 Sodium Hydroxide pellets 
 Chloroform 
 Sodium Sulphate 
 Ammonium Hydroxide 
 Phosphate Buffer solution 
 4-Aminoantipyrine solution 
 Potassium Ferricyanide solution 
 Phosphoric Acid 
20 
Anionic 6.2, Sl No. Annex L of IS 13428 • pH Meter • Sodium Chloride 
Surface xx) of Table 
 
• Spectrophotometer (650 nm) 10mm • Ethyl Acetate 
Active 2 Detection limit about & 50mm cells • Al2O3 
Agents (as 
 
0.05 mg/l 
 
• Chloroform 
MBAS) 
  
• Gas Stripping Apparatus (1 lit • Ethanol 
   
Capacity) • Methanol 
   
• Nitrogen Air (20 ltr/hr to 50 ltr/hr) • Sulphuric Acid 
   
• Reflux Condenser • Ethanolic Sodium Hydroxide-0.1 mol/lit 
   
• Fuming hood (Sodium Hydroxide, Ethanol) 
   
• Water bath • Methylene Blue, Neutral Solution 
    
• Methylene Blue, Acidic Solution 
    
• Buffer Solution, pH 10 (Sodium 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
    
Hydrogen Carbonate, Anhydrous 
    
Sodium Carbonate) 
    
• Phenolphthalein Indicator, Ethanol 
    
Dodecyl Benzene Sulphonic Acid 
    
Methyl Ester (Tetrapropylene Type), 
    
Stock Standard Solution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
C- REQUIREMENTS FOR TOXIC SUBSTANCES 
 
 
SI. 
Tests 
Clause Ref. of Referred Method of 
Test /Equipment /Apparatus Chemical/Regents 
No. IS 13428:2005 
 
Tests & 
  
Limit of Detection 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 MERCURY 
6.2, Sl. No.v) of IS 3025 (Part 48) • Atomic Absorption Spectrometer and • Sulphuric acid, conc. 
Table 3 i) Cold Vapour 
 
Associated Equipment (Cold Vapour • Nitric acid, Conc. 
 
Atomic Absorption 
 
Technique) 
• 
Stannous chloride 
 
Spectrophotometry • Mercury Vapour Generation • Hydrochloric acid, Conc. 
 
Detection limit 
 
Assembly • Sodium chloride 
 
• Mercury Hollow Cathode Lamp • Hydroxylamine sulphate  
0.0002 mg/l, Min 
 
• Recorder/Printer/Display • Potassium permanganate 
   
Meter • Potassium persulphate 
  
• BOD bottle, 300 ml • Mercuric chloride 
  
• Water bath • Mercury free distilled 
  
• Equipment assembly as per Fig 1 
 water 
   
ii) Colorimetric • Spectrophotometer • Redistilled or Deionised 
Dithizone Method • Separating Funnels (250 and 1000ml 
 
Distilled Water (Mercury 
  
with PTFE stopcocks) 
 
free) 
Detection limit • 
Glass wares • Mercuric chloride 
0.002 mg/l, Min 
• Whatman Filter No. 42 • Nitric acid, Conc. 
   
• 
Potassium permanganate 
   
• Potassium persulphate 
   
• 
Hydroxylamine 
    
hydrochloride 
   
• Dithiozone solution, 6 μg/ml 
   
• Sulphuric acid – 0.25 N 
   
• Potassium bromide 
   
• 
Chloroform 
   
• Disodium hydrogen 
    
phosphate 
   
• Anhydrous potassium 
    
carbonate 
   
• 
Sodium sulphate, Anhydrous 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
     
• 
Hydrochloric acid(1:1) 
• 
Ammonium hydroxide 
2 CADMIUM 
6.2, Sl. No. ii) IS 3025 (Part 41) • Atomic Absorption spectrophotometer • Hydrochloric acid, Conc. 
of Table 3 
  
with Air-Acetylene Flame • Nitric acid, Conc. 
 
i) Atomic 
  
• Nitric acid, dilute – 1:499 
 
Absorption • Cadmium Hollow Cathode Lamp or 
• 
Pure Cadmium Metal 
 
Method (Direct) 
 
Multi Element Hollow Cathode Lamp 
 
Detection range 
 
for Use at 228.8 nm 
  
 
0.05 to 2mg/l 
    
   
ii) Atomic • Atomic Absorption spectrophotometer • Hydrochloric acid, Conc. 
Absorption Method 
 
with Air-Acetylene Flame • Hydrochloric acid – 1:49 
(Chelation and 
  
• Nitric acid, Conc. 
Extraction) 
• 
Cadmium Hollow Cathode Lamp or 
• Nitric acid, dilute – 1:499 
Detection range 
• Multi Element Hollow Cathode Lamp • Pure Cadmium Metal 
 
for use at 228.8 nm 
• Sodium hydroxide 
0.005 to 0.2mg/l 
  
• 
Separating funnel 
• 
Methyl Isobutyl Ketone 
 
 
(MIBK) 
 
• pH meter 
 
• Bromophenol Blue 
 
• 
pH paper 
 
• Ethanol or Isopropanol 
   
• Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamic 
    
acid 
   
• 
Carbon Disulphide 
   
iii) Differential Pulse • Polarograph – Capable of Differential • Hydrochloric Acid, Conc., 
Anodic Stripping 
 
Pulse Work 
 
spectrograde 
Voltametry • Hanging Mercury Drop Electrode • Nitric Acid, Conc., 
Detection range • Platinum Counter Electrode 
 
spectrograde 
0.0001 to 0.1mg/l 
• 
Saturated calomel Reference Electrode 
• 
Nitric Acid, dil – 1:1 
 
• Magnetic Stirrer Control Unit with 
• Hydroxylamine Hydrochloride 
 
 
Stirring Bar 
 
• L-Ascorbic Acid 
 
• Nitrogen Gas (Cylinder) 
 
• Pure Cadmium Metal  
• Scrubber assembly for nitrogen 
 
• Granular Zinc 
 
 
purification 
 
• Mercury 
 
• 
Voltametric Cell assembly 
 
• 
Ammonium Meta Vanadate 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 ARSENIC 
6.2, Sl. No. i) IS 3025(Part 37) 
    
of Table 3 
 
i) Atomic absorption 
 
• 
 
Atomic absorption spectrometer 
 
• 
 
Argon or Nitrogen and 
 
method 
 
equipped with gas flow meter for 
 
Hydrogen 
   
Argon or Nitrogen and Hydrogen and • Sodium borohydride 
 
Detection limit 
 
with arsenic electrodeless discharge 
• 
Sodium hydroxide 
 
0.001 mg/l 
 
lamp 
 
• Sodium Iodide 
  
• Atomizer 
  
• Sulphuric acid-18N & 2.5 N 
  
• Reaction cell for producing arsenic 
  
• 
Potassium persulphate 
   
hydride 
  
• Eye dropper or syringe • Nitric acid, conc 
  
• Refrigerator • Perchloric acid, conc 
    
• Hydrochloric acid, conc 
    
• Arsenic trioxide 
    
• Arsenic pentaoxide 
    
• Dimethyl arsenic 
     
acid/cacodylic acid 
    
• 
Calcium chloride 
   
ii) Silver diethyl Arsine generator & absorption assembly • Hydrochoric acid , Conc 
dithiocarbamate (Fig. 2 of IS 3025 Pt 37) • 
Potassium Iodide 
method 
Spectrophotometer, 535 nm with 1 cm 
• Stannous chloride, arsenic 
 
 
free 
(Referee method) 
cells 
• Lead acetate 
Detection limit 
 
• 
Ephedrine 
0.001 mg/l 
 
• Pyridine 
  
• Chloroform 
  
• 
Silver diethyl 
   
dithiocarbamate 
  
• Zinc – 20 to 30 mesh, 
   
arsenic free 
  
• Arsenic trioxide 
  
• 
Sodium hydroxide 
   
iii) Mercuric Arsine generator glass assembly (Fig 3 of • Sulphuric acid (1:1) 
bromide stain IS 3025 Pt 37) • 
Nitric acid, conc 
method 
 
• 
Roll cotton 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
• Lead acetate 
• Arsenic papers 
• Mercuric bromide 
• Ethyl alcohol/isopropanol 
• Potassium iodide 
• Arsenic free stannous 
chloride 
• Zinc-20 to 30 Mesh, arsenic 
free 
• Arsenic trioxide 
• Sodium hydroxide 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 CYANIDE 6.2, Sl. No. iii) IS 3025(Part.27) 
    
  
of Table 3 
    
  
i) Total cyanide after 
• 
Distillation apparatus consisting of 
• 
Sodium hydroxide 
  
distillation method 
 
boiling flask, 1l, thistle tube, Allihn • Lead carbonate-powdered 
    
water cooled condenser, gas 
• 
Sulphamic acid 
  
  
dispersion tube, needle valve, suction 
  
• 
Magnesium chloride   
Detection limit 
 
flask and suction pump (Fig 1 of IS   
• 
Sulphuric acid, conc 
  
minimum 0.02 mg/l 
 
3025 Pt 27) 
   
• Heating mantle 
• Acetic acid, glacial 
   
• Gas absorber • Potassium cyanide 
   
• 
Ground glass ST joints 
• 
Silver nitrate 
   
• Spectrophotometer for use at 62 nm • Chloramine – T 
    
with 1-cm cell 
• 
Pyridine 
   
• 
pH paper 
• 
Pyrazolone 
   
• 
Thermometer – 0
o
C – 110
0
C, l.c. 1
o
C 
• 
BIS – pyrazolone 
  
ii) Selective • 
Expanded – scale pH meter or specific 
• 
Potassium cyanide 
  
electrode method 
 
Ion meter • Silver nitrate 
   
• Cyanide Ion selective electrode • Sodium hydroxide 
  
Detection range • Reference electrode, double junction 
• 
Potassium nitrate 
  
0.05 to 10 mg/l 
  
    
• Potassium hydroxide 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
    
• Magnetic mixer with TFE coated 
 
 
stirring Bar 
5 LEAD 
6.2, Sl. No. vi) IS 3025(Part 47) 
    
of Table 3 
   
• Hydrochloric acid, conc 
 
i) Atomic absorption • Atomic absorption spectrophotometer • Nitric acid, conc. 
 
method (direct) 
 
with air acetylene flame • (Lead nitrate 
 
Detection range 1.0 • Hollow cathode lamp OR • Nitric acid, dil (1:499) 
 
to 10.0mg/l 
 
Electrodeless Discharge lamp for use 
  
   
at 283.3 nm 
  
   
   
• 
Hydrochloric acid, conc 
ii) Atomic absorption 
  
• Hydrochloric acid, dil (1:2) 
method (chelation – • Atomic absorption spectrophotometer 
• Hydrochloric acid, dil (1:49) 
extraction) 
 
with air acetylene flame 
• 
Nitric acid, conc. 
 
• Hollow cathode lamp OR Electrode 
 
• Pyrrolidine 
 
 
less Discharge lamp for use at 283.3  
• 
Chloroform 
  
nm 
 
• Separatory funnel 
• Carbon disulphide 
 
• 0.45μm membrane filter • Sodium hydroxide 
 
• Acid washed filter paper. • Bromophenol blue 
 
• 
pH meter 
• 
Lead nitrate 
   
iii) Differential pulse Polarograph capable of performing 
  
anodic stripping differential pulse work 
  
voltametry (DPASV) • Hanging mercury drop electrode • Lead nitrate 
 
• Platinum counter electrode • Hydrochloric acid, conc. 
Detection range • Saturated calomel reference electrode • Nitric acid, conc. 
0.001 to 0.1mg/l • Magnetic stirrer control unit with • Nitric acid, dil (1:1) 
  
stirring bar • Granular zinc 
 
• Scrubber assembly for nitrogen • Mercury 
  
purification • Ammonium metavanadate 
 
• Nitrogen gas (cylinder) 
  
 
• 0.45μm membrane filter 
  
   
iv) Dithizone method 
 
• 
 
Spectrophotometer for use at 510 nm 
 
• 
 
Lead free distilled water 
Detection limit 
 
with 1-cm cell • Lead nitrate 
0.1 mg/l • pH meter • Nitric acid, 95% (w/w) 
 
• TEF beakers, 100 ml • Nitric acid, dil 20% (w/w) 
 
• 
Separating funnels, 250 ml, 500 ml 
• 
Nitric acid, dil (1:1) 
   
• Ammonium hydroxide Conc. 
    
(14 N) 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
     
• 
Ammonium hydroxide, dil. 
 
10% ( v/v) 
• Ammonium hydroxide, dil. 
 
1% v/v) 
• Anhydrous Ammonium 
 
Citrate 
• Anhydrous Sodium Sulphite 
• Hydroxylamine 
 
hydrochloride 
• Potassium cyanide 
• Dithizone 
• Chloroform 
• 
Hydrochloric acid (1:1) 
6 CHROMIUM 
6.2, Sl. No. vi) Annex K of IS • Atomic absorption spectrophotometer • Deionised distilled water, 
of Table 3 13428 
 
with reducing Air – acetylene flame 
 
Ammonia free 
  
• 0.45μm membrane filter • Nitric acid, redistilled – 1:1 
  
• pH meter 
 
(v/v) 
  
• Centrifuge • Hydrochloric acid, redistilled 
     
– 1:1 (v/v) 
    
• Chromium oxide 
    
• Lanthanum chloride 
    
• Lanthanum oxide , 99.9%, 
     
w/w 
    
• Ammonium pyrrolidine 
     
dithiocarbamate 
7 NICKEL 
6.2, Sl. No. vii) Annex M of IS • Atomic absorption spectrophotometer • Nitric acid, conc. – 1.4 g/ml 
of Table 3 13428 
 
with nebulizer – burner having air- • Pure nickel metal 
   
acetylene flame • Sodium hydroxide 
  
• Centrifuge • Hydrochloric acid, conc. – 
  
• Nickel hollow cathode lamp/electrode 
 
1.19 g/ml 
   
less discharge lamp • Methyl isobutyleketone 
  
• Separating funnel, 250-ml with PTFE 
 
(MIBK) 
   
taps • Ammonium 1 – pyrrolidino 
  
• pH meter 
 
carbodithioate 
    
• Bromophenol blue 
    
• 
Ethanol 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
POLY 
6.2, Sl. No. Annex N of IS • Gas chromatograph with EC detector • Silica gel, 60 – 100 mesh 
CHLORINATED viii) of Table 3 13428 
 
& coupled with printer-plotter-cum- • N-hexane-redistilled 
BIPHENYLE 
   
integrator • Potassium hydroxide pellets 
(PCB) 
  
• 
Glass chromatographic column, 300 
• 
Sodium hydroxide solution – 
    
mm long, 8 mm ID with ground glass 
 
5N 
    
socket at the upper end and a stop • Diethyl ether, 
    
cock at low end. 
 
chromatography grade 
   
• Kuderna-Danish type, evaporator • Cotton wool, extracted with 
   
• Snyder columns 
 
hexane and diethyl ether 
   
• Syringe (5 μl) • Acetic acid, glacial, 
   
• Heating oven 
 
redistilled 
   
• 
Desiccator 
• 
Chromium trioxide, re- 
      
crystallized 
     
• Apiezon L grease 
     
• Epikote Resin 1001 – 0.15 % 
     
• Chromosorb G (acid 
      
washed) DMCS treated, 60 
      
– 80 mesh 
     
• Silicone gum GE-S-SI – 1.3 
      
% 
9 
POLYNUCLEAR 6.2, Sl. No. ix) i) High Performance • High Performance Liquid • Reagent Water 
AROMATIC of Table 3 Liquid 
 
Chromatograph (HPLC) complete with • Sodium thiosulphate, granular 
HYDROCARBON APHA 6440 Chromatography 
 
gradient pumping system, reverse • Cyclohexane 
  
(HPLC) Method 
 
phase column and detectors (UV and • Methanol 
    
fluorescence) • Acetone, 
  
ii) Gas • Gas Chromatograph (GC) complete • Methylene chloride 
  
chromatographic 
 
with column and flame ionization • Pentane – Pesticide quality or 
  
(GC) Method 
 
detector. 
 
equivalent 
   
• Separating funnel (2 l) 
   
• Acetonitrile – HPLC quality 
   
• Evaporative flask 
   
• Sodium sulphate, granular, 
   
• 
Three Ball Synder column     
anhydrous 
   
• 
Kuderna- Danish Apparatus 
• Silica Gel – 100/200 mesh 
   
• Water bath (60-65 ̊C) • Stock standard solution 
     
• Std. PAHs Solutions – 
      
a)100 μg/ml of naphthalene, 
      
acenaphthylene, fluorine, 
      
phneanthrene and anthracene. 
      
b)5μg/ml Benzo (k) 
      
Fluoranthene 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
10 
   URANIUM 
5.3, Sl. No. x) 
of Table 3 
 
IS 3025(Part 65) 
or  
IS 14194 (Part 3) 
i) Inductively coupled 
plasma mass 
spectrometry (ICP-
MS) method 
 
ii) Uranium 
Fluorimeter method 
i) Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass        
Spectrometry (ICP-MS) 
 
ii) Uranium Fluorimeter/Analyser 
 Uranium Fluorimeter 
 Platinum dishes 
 Platinum Wire Gauge 
 Fisher Burner 
 Platinum tipped forceps 
 Micropipette 0.5 ml 
 Syringe 5 ml 
 Ion-exchange column 
 Infrared Lamp of maximum 500W 
 Muffle furnace 
 Hot plate 
 
 Water, Grade 1 
 Nitric acid 
 Hydrochloric acid 
 Sulphuric acid 
 Hydrogen peroxide 
 Multi-element standard 
solutions 
 
OR 
 
 Reagent grade Sodium 
Fluoride (NaF) and Sodium 
Carbonate (Na
2
CO
3
)  
 Uranium standard 
 Hydrochloric acid 
 Nitric Acid 
 Distilled water 
 
 *Note: Besides listed Equipments/Apparatus/Chemicals, following accessories are essential part of a chemical lab: 
i) General glass wares like Pipettes Burette, Conical flasks, Beakers, Measuring cylinders, Volumetric flasks, (of different volumes) 
ii) Provision for distilled/double distilled water 
iii) Fuming Hood and sink with tap in the lab 
 
# The list does not cover the requirements of Pesticide Residues and Radio Active Residues as these requirements are to be got tested from outside 
approved lab. 
 
 

PM/ 13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
D - MICROBIOLOGICAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
General microbiological lab equipments ** 
 
• Hot air oven (capable of 160 to 180 ºC). 
• Autoclave (capable of 15 psi/ 121 ºC) of suitable size as per need. 
• Weighing Balance with least count 0.01 g (least count 0.001 g, if Tergitol-7 agar medium or Crystal violet neutral red bile lactose 
(VRBL) agar is being prepared in house). 
• pH meter with least count 0.1 pH unit. 
• Laminar air flow chamber OR Class II Biosafety Cabinets shall be used for product testing and reference culture in microbiology laboratories. 
• Hot plate for media preparation. 
• Membrane filtration assembly (including sterilized membrane filters of 47 mm to 50 mm diameter with 0.45 μm pore size, 
vacuum pump (for applying vacuum of about 70 kPa) and forceps with rounded tips). 
• Inoculation loop/needle. 
• Bunsen burner with LPG cylinder. 
• Thermostatically controlled water bath. 
• Air conditioner (recommended) 
• Refrigerator 
• Colony counting equipment (recommended) 
• General glasswares including, petri dishes (made of glass or plastic), volumetric pipettes (of capacity 1 ml and 10 ml), flasks, test 
tubes, culture bottles, funnels, glass rod, measuring cylinders. 
• Thermometer with least count, at least four times smaller than the range of required maximum permissible tolerance shall be used) 
• Filter paper 
• Cotton 
 Ready-to-use microbiological culture plates may also be used against the medias, as mentioned in the table below 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
SI. 
No. 
Parameter Clause Ref. Referred 
Method 
of Test 
Test Equipment/Apparatus ** Chemicals/Media/Reagents ** 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1 Escherichia 
coli (or 
thermotolerant 
bacteria) 
6.1.1 of 
IS13428 
IS 15185 /ISO 
9308-1 
• General microbiological lab equipments 
(as listed above) 
• Incubator capable of maintaining (36+2)
0
C 
• Equipment, for membrane filtration 
 
• Membrane filters 
• Disinfected forceps, for handling of 
membrane filters. 
• @Incubator capable of maintaining 44°C 
• Microscope and Glass slides (for 
Gram staining) 
• Distilled water 
 
 
 
 
• Chromogenic Coliform Agar 
(Enzymatic digest of casein 
1.0g, Yeast Extract 2.0g, 
Sodium chloride 5.0g, 
• Sodium dihydrogen phosphate 
x 2H2O 2.2g, 
• Disodium Hydrogen Phosphate 
2.7g, 
• Sodium pyruvate 1.0g, 
• Sorbitol 1.0g, 
• Tryptophane 1.0g,  6-chloro  3 
indoxyl Beta D 
Galactopyranoside 0.2g, 5- 
Bromo 4-Chloro 3Indoxyl Beta 
D Glucuronic Acid 0.1g, 
• Iso propyl Beta D 
thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) 
0.1g, 
• Bacteriological Agar 9-18g 
• Water 1000ml 
• pH 6.8±0.2 at 25°C. 
• Oxidase reagent: 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
     
• 
N,N,N’,N’- Tetramethyl p 
 
phenylenediamine 
 
 
dihydrochloride 0.1g, 
 
• Water 10ml 
  
• Tryptone Soya Agar: 
 
• Tryptone 15.0g, 
 
• Soya Peptone 5.0g, 
 
• Sodium Chloride 5.0g, 
 
• Agar 15-25g, 
  
• Water 1000ml 
  
• pH 7.2±0.2 at 25°C 
 
• @Medium for indole 
 
production 
  
• @Kovac’s reagent (for indole 
 
test) 
  
• Gram stain – (Methyl violet or 
 
Crystal violet, Iodine, 
 
 
Potassium iodide; Neutral red, 
 
Acetic acid, Ethanol) 
 
2 
Coliform  
Bacteria 
6.1.2 of IS 
i) Reference • General microbiological lab equipments • Distilled water 
 
 13428 : method 
 
(as listed above) 
  
 
2005 
 
• Incubator capable of operating at 37 ºC ± • Crystal violet neutral red bile 
 
 IS 5401 (Pt. 1) 
 
1 ºC 
 
lactose (VRBL) agar – 
 
  
/ISO 4832 
• Petri dishes, made of glass or plastic, of 
 
• (Enzymatic digest of animal 
   
 
diameter 90 mm to 100 mm 
   
 
tissues, Yeast extract, Lactose, 
   
• Total-delivery pipettes, having nominal 
   
 
Sodium chloride, Bile salts, 
   
 
capacities of 1ml 
   
 
Neutral red, Crystal violet,    
• Water bath, or similar apparatus, capable 
   
 
Agar) 
  
    
of operating at 44 to 47°C 
   
• Colony-counting equipment, consisting of 
    
    
an illuminated base and a mechanical or 
    
    
electronic digital counter. 
    

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
    • Test tubes of dimensions approximately 
  
 
16 mm x 160 mm • 
@ 
Brilliant green lactose bile 
• Durham tubes of dimensions appropriate 
 
broth – (Enzymatic digest of 
 
for use with the test tubes 
 
casein, Lactose, Dehydrated ox 
• Bottles or flasks, for boiling and storage 
 
bile, Brilliant green) 
 
 
of culture media 
   
   
ii) IS 15185 • General microbiological lab equipments • Distilled water 
  
/ISO 9308-1 
 
(as listed above) 
  
• Sample quantity : 50 ml 
  
 
• Incubator, thermostatically controlled at 
  
  
(36 ± 2) °C. 
• 
Chromogenic Coliform Agar 
 
• Equipment, for membrane filtration 
 
(Enzymatic digest of casein 
 
 
1.0g, Yeast Extract 2.0g, 
 
• Membrane filters 
 
 
Sodium chloride 5.0g, 
 
 
• Disinfected forceps, for handling of 
 
• Sodium dihydrogen phosphate 
 
 
membrane filters. 
 
 
x 2H2O 2.2g, 
  
 
• @Incubator capable of maintaining 44°C 
 
• Disodium Hydrogen Phosphate 
 
• Microscope and Glass slides (for 
 
2.7g, 
   
  
Gramstaining) • Sodium pyruvate 1.0g, 
 
   
• Sorbitol 1.0g, 
  
   
• Tryptophane 1.0g,  
    
6-chloro 3 indoxyl Beta 
    
D Galactopyranoside 0.2g,  5- 
    
Bromo 4-Chloro 3Indoxyl Beta 
    
D Glucuronic Acid 0.1g, 
 
   
• Iso propyl Beta D 
    
thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) 
    
0.1g, 
   
   
• Bacteriological Agar 9-18g 
   
• Water 1000ml 
  
   
• pH 6.8±0.2 at 25°C. 
  
   
• 
Oxidase reagent: 
  

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
     
• 
N,N,N’,N’- Tetramethyl p 
 
phenylenediamine 
 
 
dihydrochloride 0.1g, 
 
• Water 10ml 
  
• 
Tryptone Soya Agar: 
 
• Tryptone 15.0g, 
 
• Soya Peptone 5.0g, 
 
• Sodium Chloride 5.0g, 
 
• Agar 15-25g, 
  
• Water 1000ml 
 
• pH 7.2±0.2 at 25°C 
 
• @Medium for indole 
 
production 
  
• @Kovac’s reagent (for indole 
 
test) 
  
• Gram stain – (Methyl violet or 
 
Crystal violet, Iodine, 
 
 
Potassium iodide; Neutral red, 
 
Acetic acid, Ethanol) 
 
3 
Sulphite 
reducing 
 
Annex C of • General microbiological lab equipments • Distilled water 
 
anaerobes 6.1.4 of IS13428 
 
(as listed above) • Differential reinforced 
 
 
IS13428 : 
 
• Sample quantity : 50 ml 
 
clostridial medium (DRCM) – 
 
2005 
 
• 
Screw cap bottles or vials and stoppers of 
 
Double strength and Single 
    
boron silicate glass of capacities 100 ml 
 
Strength (if necessary) 
 
   
• Water bath capable at 75 ± 5 °C. 
 
(Peptone tryptic digest of meat 
   
• Iron wire 
 
, Meat extract, Yeast extract, 
   
• Incubator (37 ºC ± 1 ºC) 
 
Starch, Hydrated sodium 
   
• Appropriate method to hermetically seal 
 
acetate, Glucose, L- cysteine- 
   
 
the vial or anaerobic systems 
 
hydrochloride, Sodium 
 
   
 
hydroxide) 
  
   
• Anaerobic jar assembly (recommended) 
   
• Sodium sulphite 
 
    • 
Iron (III) citrate 
 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
4 
Pseudomonas 
 
Annex D of • General microbiological lab equipments 
• Distilled water 
• Medium for determination of 
presumed Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa – (DL asparagine, 
L proline, Anhydrous 
dipotassium hydrogen 
phosphate, Magnesium 
sulphate heptahydrate, 
Anhydrous potassium 
sulphate, Ethanol) 
• 
@ 
Confirmatory medium (Milk 
agar medium) – [Skim milk 
powder, Bacteriological yeast 
extract, Peptone, Sodium 
chloride, Agar 
hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium 
bromide (centrimide)] 
• 
@ 
Clause D-10 (NOTE) of IS 
13428 : 2005 specifies 
confirmation of non- 
pigmented strains as a further 
step, if required. Annex 2D of 
IS 13428 : 2005 specifies 
biochemical characteristics to 
be tested for this purpose. 
• No specific apparatus, media 
and reagents have been 
specified for the same. It is 
specified that commercially 
available identification kits 
may be used for this.For 
example Gram Staining Kit, 
Spore Staining Kit, Reagent 
for Oxidase test, Hydrogen 
Peroxide for Catalase Test, 
aeruginosa 6.1.5 of IS13428 
 
(as listed above) 
 
IS13428 : 
 
• Screw capped bottles 
 
2005 
 
• 
Incubator (37 ± 1° C) 
   
• @Incubator, capable of being maintained 
    
at 42 ± 0.5° C 
   
• 
@Incubator 4° C 
   
• UV cabinet fitted with UV lamp emitting 
    
light of wavelength 360 ± 20 nm 
   
• Cellulose acetate or nitrate membrane of 
    
pore size 0.22 μm (for alternate 
    
sterilization of ethanol) 
   
• 
@ 
Incubator, capable of being maintained 
    
at 42 ± 0.5° C 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
     
 
Hugh and Leifson Medium, 
 
Media for Nitrate Reductase 
 
Test, for Acetamide 
 
Deaminase activity, for Gelatin 
 
Liquification and for Starch 
 
Hydrolysis. 
6 
Yeast and 
 
IS 5403 
• General microbiological lab equipments • Distilled water 
Mould 6.1.7 of (as listed above) • Yeast extract-dextrose- 
 
IS13428 • Incubator (25 ± 1 ºC) 
 
chloramphenicol-agar medium 
  
• 
 
– (Yeast extract, Dextrose, 
    
Chloramphenicol or 
    
Oxytetracycline hydrochloride, 
    
Agar) 
 
 
** NOTES 
 
Note 1 – The list does not cover the following requirements, as these parameters are to be tested from outside approved lab: 
i) Faecal streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus. 
ii) Salmonella and Shigella. 
iii) Vibrio cholera and V. parahaemolyticus. 
 
Note 2 – General Microbiological Lab Equipments as listed are common for various microbiological tests. Other additional equipments required  for 
specific test methods are indicated against each parameter. 
 
Note  3 – For  preparation  of  culture  media  and  reagents  ingredients  of  uniform  quality  and  chemicals  of  analytical  reagent  grade should  be  used. 
Alternatively, commercially available media and reagents may be used provided their composition comply with those given in Indian Standards 
 
Note 4 – Disposable glassware may be accepted as an alternative to re-usable glassware. 
 
Note 5 – All efforts have been made to compile the list as per the respective standards exhaustively covering all the required test equipments, apparatus 
and chemicals. However, in case any omission or incorrectness is noticed while referring, the same may be conveyed to CMD immediately for suitable 
actions. 
 
The marked equipments/ chemicals and media are required for confirmatory tests of respective microorganisms. The confirmatory test may be 
dispensed with/omitted, provided the licensee undertakes to start corrective actions based on presumptive presence of microorganisms. 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
E - REQUIREMENTS FOR BOTTLES/CONTAINERS FOR PACKAGED WATER 
 
 
 
 
SI. 
No. 
Clause No. 
of IS 
15410:2003 
Specified Requirement Test Facility Requirement 
Range and 
Accuracy/ Least 
Count (If    and as 
Applicable) 
Method of Test/ 
Remarks (If any) 
1 4.1 Material --- 
 
---- 
Raw Material 
conformity to ISs is 
indicated 
2 4.2 
4.2.1 
Design, Shape and Dimensions Visual ----- 
 
3 4.3 
4.3.1 
4.3.2 
Manufacture, 
Workmanship, 
Finish and 
Appearance 
Visual 
 
------- 
--------- 
 
To adhere GMP 
-- 
4 4.4 Capacity Weighing Balance 
Suitable range with , 
LC 0.1 g for 
Balanceor1 ml for 
Cylinder 
Cl 5 of IS 2798 
5 4.5 Wall Thickness Micrometer Suitable Range with 
LC 0.02 mm 
Cl 4.5 of IS 2798 
6 4.6.2 Transparency Transparency/ Haze Meter Range upto 100 %,LC 
1% 
Annex A of IS 15410 
7 4.6.3 Leakage Test Vibration Leakage Tester as per Cl. 
6.2.1 of IS 2798 
Reservoir 
Air Pressure Leakage Tester 
- Cl 6 of IS 2798 
8 4.6.4 Drop Test Drop Tester with height of 0.5 m 
 
Cl 8 of IS 2798 
9 4.6.5 Migration Test Oven/Water Bath 
Hot Plate 
Analytical Balance 
SS Evaporating Dish 
Capable of 
maintaining40+2° C 
IS 9845 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
   
Dessicator 
Glass Beaker, pyrex, 1000 ml 
Pouch Sealing Machine 
  
10 4.6.6 Water Potability test Conditioning Chamber 
Capable of 
maintaining 38+2° C 
Annex B of IS 15410 
 
 
F- REQUIREMENTS FOR POLYETHYLENE FLEXIBLE POUCHES FOR PACKAGED WATER 
 
 
SI. Clause No. 
Specified Requirement Test Facility Requirement 
Range and Method of Test/ 
No. of IS Accuracy/ Least Remarks (If any) 
 
15410:2003 Count (If and as 
 
  
Applicable) 
  
Clause 6.1 Requirements for Films 
1 6.1.1 Description Visual --------------------- 
 
2 6.1.2 Film Form Visual --------------------- 
 
3 6.1.3 Winding of Film Visual --------------------- 
 
4 6.1.4 Odour Olfactory --------------------- 
 
5 6.1.5 
Thickness Dead Weight Dial Suitable Range with 
A-2 of IS 2508 
(65± 5μ/ 75± 5μ) Micrometer LC1μ 
 
6 6.1.6 Width (in mm) Scale 
Suitable Range, 
 
LC 1 mm 
 
7 6.1.7 Overall Migration 
Oven/Water Bath Capable of 
IS 9845 
Hot Plate 
maintaining 40±2
o 
C 
Analytical Balance 
 
SS Evaporating Dish 
 
Dessicator 
 
Glass Beaker, pyrex, 1000 ml 
 
Pouch Sealing Machine 
 

 
 
       
PM/ 13428/ 3 
       
January 2023 
8 6.1.8 Tensile Strength 
Tensile Testing Machine of suitable 
LC 0.01 kN A-4 of IS 9845 
range 
9 6.1.9 Elongation at break 
Tensile Testing Machine of suitable 
LC 0.01 kN A-4 of IS 9845 
range 
10 6.1.10 Dart Impact Resistance 
Dart Impact Tester with Drop Height Set of weights (Min. 
A-6 of IS 9845 
of 66 cm Impact failure load : 
 
2.20 N) 
  
Clause 7 Requirements for Pouches 
11 7.1 Vibration Leakage Test 
Vibration Table Temp. - Ambient Table conforming to 
Annex D of IS 15609 
or27 ± 2
0 
C in case of dispute IS 7028 (Pt 2) 
 
Frequency 
 
of 
 
vibration 2 Hz 
 
12 7.2 Water Potability Test 
Oven/Heating Arrangement Pouch Capable 
 
of 
Annex E of IS 15609 
Sealing Machine maintaining 38±2
o 
C 
13 7.3 Stack Load Test 
Flat Wooden Plank Set of weights for20 
Annex F of IS 15609 
Temp. - Ambient or N to 200 N 
  
27±2
0 
C in case of dispute 
   
14 7.4 Drop Test 
Arrangement for flat drop from 1.2 m 
---------- Annex G of IS 15609 
height 
15 7.5 
Ink Adhesion Test for Printed Pressure Sensitive Tapes or Cello- 25 mm wide tape 
 
Annex H of IS 15609 
Pouch Tape Arrangement for 
  
pulling tape at 
  
10mm/s at about 90 
o
 
16 7.6 
Product Resistance Test for 
Paper Tissue ------------- Annex J of IS 15609 
Printed Pouch 
Clause 8 Construction 
17 8 Construction Visual -------------- 
 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
ANNEX F 
SCHEME OF INSPECTION AND TESTING 
FOR PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER ACCORDING TO IS 13428: 2005 
 
1.0 LABORATORY -A laboratory shall be maintained which shall be suitably equipped and staffed 
with competent testing person(s) to carry out the different tests in accordance with the methods given in 
the Indian  standards.  Testing  person(s)  shall  be  science/engineering  graduate  from  disciplines  such  as 
chemistry/chemical engineering/  microbiology/  biotechnology/  biochemistry/  food  technology/  botany 
and other biological/ life sciences. Engineering graduates from disciplines such as chemical engineering 
may also be engaged as testing persons. 
1.1. The manufacturer shall prepare and implement a calibration plan for the test equipment.  
 
2. TEST RECORDS –The manufacturer shall maintain test records for the tests carried out to establish 
conformity. 
 
3.0 LABELLING AND MARKING - The Standard Mark, as given in the Schedule of the Licence shall 
be clearly marked legibly and indelibly on the label of the bottle/container or on the pouch as the case may 
be, provided always that the material on which this Mark is applied conforms to every requirement of the 
specification. The dimension of standard mark shall be in accordance with specified design. 
 
3.1 PACKING – The Packaged  Natural Mineral Water shall be packed as per clause  3.2, clause 7 and 
Annex B of IS 13428:2005. The pouches and bottles/containers shall be supplied in secondary packaging 
as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 
 
3.2 Packaged Natural  Mineral Water  packed  in  Paper  based  multilayer  laminated/extruded  composite 
cartons shall conform to IS 17753 and aluminum cans shall conform to Indian standard on 'Aluminum 
cans for packaged  natural mineral water and packaged  drinking water — Specification [Doc: PGD 38 
(20182)] as per provisions of Cl. 7.1.2 of IS 13428:2005. 
 
3.3 All packaging materials of plastic origin shall pass the overall migration, colour migration and specific 
migration limits for toxic substances as laid down in IS 15410 as per provisions of Cl. 7.1.3 of IS 
13428:2005. 
 
3.4 MARKING – In  addition  to  the  Standard  Mark  as  per  clause  8  of  IS  13428:2005  the  following 
information shall be given legibly & indelibly on each bottle/container or its label or directly printed on 
the pouch/bottle/container. 
i. Name of the product (i.e. Natural Mineral Water) 
ii. Supplementary designations, if any; 
iii. Name and full address of the processor (i.e. manufacturer); 
iv. Brand Name, if any; 
v. Batch or Code Number/Control Unit No.; 
vi. Date of manufacture/ packaging’ and ‘Expiry/Use by; 
vii. Best before date (optional); 
viii. Net quantity; 
ix. Location and name of the source of natural mineral water. 
x. Direction for storage; 
xi. Keep the container away from direct sunlight; and 
xii. Any other information required under the Legal Metrology(Packaged Commodity) Rules, 
2011 and the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations 2011. 
xiii. Recycling symbol as per IS 14534 and 14535 
xiv. BIS website details: www.bis.gov.in 
 
3.4.1 Minimum height of the BIS Standard Mark on different pack sizes of Packaged Natural 
Mineral Water shall be as under: 
S. No. Size of Container Min height of BIS Standard Mark* 
1 
Pouch/Cups/bottle(250 ml capacity & 
5mm 
below) 
2 
Bottles upto 500ml capacity & below 
7.5mm 
(but greater than 250 ml capacity) 
3 Bottles more than 500ml capacity 10mm 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
4 All re-useable Jars 15mm 
(* other dimensions of the BIS Standard Mark shall  be in appropriate proportions as 
per BIS guidelines). 
 
 
3.5 Each  secondary  packing  of  pouches/bottles/containers  shall  be  marked  with  the  following,  except 
where  such  secondary  packing  is  transparent  and  the  markings  on  the  pouches/bottles/containers  are 
legible through the secondary packing: 
i. Indication of the source of manufacture i.e. manufacturer’s name and address; 
ii. Number of pouches/bottles/containers 
iii. Brand name, if any 
iv. Nominal capacity; 
v. Batch No. or Code No. 
 
3.6 LABELLING PROHIBITIONS -The label on the bottles/containers/pouches and/or the secondary 
packaging shall not contain claims which are prohibited as per clause 8.2 of IS 13428:2005. 
 
3.7 Shelf  life:  Declared  shelf  life  for  Packaged  Natural  Mineral  Water  in  all  type  of  packing 
materials shall not be less than 30 days. (also see Table 1 and Note 8 under Table 1) 
 
3.8 Brand names: The labels conforming to the marking details as mentioned in clause 8 of IS 13428 
along with the brand names are to be submitted by licensees to BIS for information only, which will only 
be noted by BIS for records. The compliance of such labels to the requirement of clause 8 shall be ensured 
by  licensees.  However,  in  case  non-compliance  to  Clause  8  is  observed  by  BIS  and communicated  in 
writing to licensee, licensee shall make necessary rectification and resubmit the label for confirmation to 
concerned BIS Branch Office within 15 days. Decision of BIS regarding whether labeling is complying 
or not with clause 8 of IS 13428 shall be final. 
 
4.0  LEVELS  OF  CONTROL -The  tests  as indicated  in  Table  1  and  at  the  levels  of  control  specified 
therein, shall be carried out on the whole production of the factory covered by this Scheme and appropriate 
records maintained in accordance with clause 2 of this Scheme. Entire production which conforms to the 
Indian Standard and covered by the licence shall be marked with Certification Mark of the Bureau. 
 
5.0 CONTROL UNIT - For the purpose of this Scheme, the quantity of packaged natural mineral water 
treated/processed from each processing line and filled/packed in one day shall constitute a Control Unit. 
 
5.1 On the basis of tests and analysis results, the decision regarding conformity or otherwise of a Control 
Unit to the given requirements shall be made. 
 
5.2 In respect of all other clauses of the Standard (other than those mentioned under Levels of Control– 
Table  1  of  this  Scheme)  the  factory  shall  maintain  appropriate  controls  and  checks  to  ensure  that  their 
product conforms to the requirements of the standard. 
 
6.0 Microbiological Requirements - If any failure is noticed in any of the microbiological requirements, 
control units available in the stock shall be rechecked and released into the market only after conformity 
is ensured. 
 
6.1 The licensee shall take immediate corrective actions, which would involve complete investigation of 
the reasons for contamination and non-conformity. The manufacturer should re- start marking and dispatch 
only  after  the  completion  of  satisfactory  corrective  actions  and  availability  of  satisfactory  results of  all 
microbiological tests  as  applicable  for  each  control  unit,  for  next  2  consecutive  control  units.  The 
manufacturer shall keep complete records of such instances for review by BIS for minimum period of 5 
years. 
 
7.0 SOURCE WATER - The source water used in production of Packaged Natural Mineral Water shall 
be initially tested for Organoleptic and physical parameters (Table 1), Chemical requirements (Table 2), 
and  all  microbiological  requirements  possible  to  be  tested  in  house.  Subsequently,  its  quality  may  be 
regularly  assessed  at  least  once  in  three  months  through  in- house  testing  for  Colour,  Odour,  Taste, 
Turbidity, pH, Total Dissolved Solids and Microbiological requirements. In addition, any other 
requirements  as  considered  necessary  for  process  control,  are  to  be  tested  where  the  incidence  of  their 
presence in higher levels has been detected during the previous tests. 
 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
7.1 The permitted treatment under clause 3 and 4 of IS 13428 shall only be carried out on condition that 
the mineral content of water is not modified. Whenever, the quality of processed mineral water is found to 
be not meeting the requirements of IS 13428 for the tested parameters, the source water shall be checked 
again  for  such  parameters  in  which  failure  is  observed  for  deciding  upon  the  necessary  controls to be 
exercised for conformance of quality of processed water to IS 13428. 
 
7.2 In case non-conformity  is observed for radioactive residues,  the source of raw water shall be 
abandoned and water shall be recalled immediately. 
 
7.3 As and when there is change in source water, it shall be intimated to BIS. The raw water collected from 
the new  source shall  be tested  in  accordance  with  Clause 7  as above and the processed  mineral water 
produced from such source water shall be tested for conformity to IS 13428 from BIS recognized outside 
lab. The reports of source water and the product water produced from the new source shall be submitted to 
BIS for approval before commissioning for regular production and marking. 
 
8.0 Plastic Jars/Bottles/Containers - The plastic containers used for packing the material shall conform 
to IS 15410:2003. The conformity assessment shall be carried in accordance with the levels of controls 
as given under Table 2. 
 
8.1 In addition, the top lid for glasses/cups shall be of suitable peelable structure in accordance with Clause 
4.2.1 of IS 15410:2003. 
 
8.2 Pouches–The polyethylene film and pouches shall conform to IS 15609. The conformity assessment 
shall be carried in accordance with the levels of controls as given under Table3. 
 
8.3 Glass Bottles - IS 11984 has been specified as a reference Indian Standard for glass bottles. However, 
if  any  manufacturer  intends  to  use  glass  bottles  for  packaging,  it  shall  be  included  in  the  licence.  The 
separate processing line for filling the glass bottles may be verified by BIS during the next inspection and 
necessary steps in the  process  for ensuring sterility of bottles may be  adopted  like  steam sterilizing, hot 
water rinsing, UV sterilization or combination thereof. In case of lug caps containing plastic lining, food 
grade certificate or OSL test report for migration testing may be accepted. 
 
8.4 Paper based multilayer laminated/extruded composite cartons and aluminum cans - Paper based 
multilayer laminated/extruded  composite  cartons shall conform to IS 17753. The  conformity assessment 
shall be carried in accordance with the levels of controls as given under Table 4.  
Aluminum cans shall conform to Indian standard on 'Aluminum cans for packaged natural mineral water 
and packaged drinking water — Specification' [Doc: PGD 38 (20182)]. 
 
9.0 REUSED CONTAINERS – Licensee shall ensure use of only such jars for packing the product water 
whose transparency continues to meet the requirements as per IS 15410 even  after its  repeated use. Jars 
which get soiled, de-shaped and/or mutilated during the course of use and refilling shall not be used. 
 
9.1 Water to be used for the purpose of cleaning etc. IS 4251:1967 may be followed as Good 
Manufacturing practices. 
 
10.0  HYGIENIC  CONDITION - The  Natural  Mineral  water  shall  be  collected,  processed,  handled, 
stored,  packed  and  marketed  in  accordance  with  the  hygienic  practices  given  under  Annex  B  of  IS 
13428:2005. Other clauses shall also be complied in day to day production and quality control activities. 
Schedule  for  each  activity  for  this  purpose  shall  be  displayed  prominently  in  the  factory  premises  and 
records of compliance shall be maintained for scrutiny by the Bureau. The hygienic conditions shall also 
be  maintained at the site of water source. A check list for good hygienic practices and food safety system 
for packaged drinking water processing units is given in Annex H of this product manual. 
 
11.0 REJECTION - Disposal of non-conforming product shall be done in such a way so as to ensure that 
there is no violation of provisions of BIS Act, 2016. A separate record providing the detailed information 
regarding the rejected control units and mode of their disposal shall be maintained. Such material shall in 
no case be stored together with that conforming to the specification. 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
IS 13428:2005 PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER 
TABLE 1 LEVELS OF CONTROL 
(Para 4 of the Scheme of Inspection and Testing) 
 
TEST DETAILS 
Test equipment 
LEVELS OF CONTROL 
 
REMARKS 
Clause Requirement 
Test Method requirement No. of 
Frequency 
Clause Reference 
R: required (or)S: Sub- Sample 
contracting permitted  
6.1 Microbiological Requirement 
6.1.1 Escherichia coli -- IS 15185 R One Each control unit 
 
 
6.1.2 
 
Coliform Bacteria 
 
-- 
IS 5401 (Part-1)* 
R 
 
One 
 
Each control unit 
 
or IS 15185 
6.1.3 
Faecal Streptococci and Staphylococcus 
-- 
IS 5887 (Part-2)* 
S One Once in a month 
 
aureus or IS 15186 
6.1.4 Sulphite Reducing Anaerobes -- 
Annex C of IS 
R One Each control unit 
 
13428 
6.1.5 Pseudomonas aeruginosa -- 
Annex D of IS 
R One Each control unit 
 
13428 
6.1.6 Yeast &Mould -- IS 5403 R One Each control unit 
 
6.1.7 Salmonella and Shigella -- 
IS 15187 & IS 
S One Once in a month 
 
5887 (Part-7), 
respectively 
6.1.8 Vibrio cholera and V. parahaemolyticus -- IS 5887 (Part-5) S One Once in a month 
 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
TABLE 1 (continued) 
TEST DETAILS Test equipment LEVELS OF CONTROL 
 
REMARKS 
Clause Requirement 
Test Method requirement No. of 
Frequency 
Clause Reference 
R: required (or)S: Sample 
Sub-contracting 
 
permitted 
 
6.2 and Table 1 i) Colour - IS 3025 (Part 4) R One Each Control Unit See Note 2 
-do- ii) Odour - IS 3025 (Part 5) R One Each Control Unit -do- 
-do- iii) Taste - IS 3025 (Part 8) R One Each Control Unit -do- 
-do- iv) Turbidity - IS 3025 (Part 10) R One Each Control Unit -do- 
-do- v) Total Dissolved Solids - IS 3025 (Part 16) R One Each Control Unit See Note 3 
-do- vi) pH - IS 3025 (Part 11) R One Every four hours See Note 2 
6.2 and Table 2 i) Nitrate (as NO3) - IS 3025 (Part 34) R One Once in a week See Note 4 
-do- ii) Nitrite (as NO2) - IS 3025 (Part 34) R One Once in a week -do- 
-do- iii) Sulphide (as H2S) - IS 3025 (Part 29) R One Once in a week -do- 
-do- 
iv) Manganese (as Mn) 
- 
IS 3025 (Part 59)* or IS 
R One Once in a week -do- 
  
3025 (Part 2) 
-do- 
v) Copper (as Cu) 
- 
IS 3025 (Part 42)* or IS 
R One Once in a week -do- 
  
3025(Part 2) 
-do- vii) Fluoride (as F) - IS 3025 (Part 60) S One Once in six months See Note 6 
 
viii) Barium (as Ba) 
- 
Annex G of IS 
R One Once in a week See Note 4 
  
13428* or IS 15302 or 
  
IS 3025 (Part 2) 
-do- ix) Antimony (as Sb) - 
Annex H of IS 13428* 
S One Once in a month See Note 5 
or IS 15303 
-do- x) Borates (as B) - 
Annex J of IS 13428* or 
S One Once in a month -do- 
IS 3025 (Part 2) 
-do- xi) Silver (as Ag) - Annex K of IS 13428 S One Once in six months See Note 6 
-do- xii) Chloride (as Cl) - IS 3025 (Part 32) R One Each control unit See Note 2 
-do- xiii) Sulphate (as SO4) - IS 3025 (Part 24) R One Each control unit See Note 2 
-do- 
xvi) Magnesium (as Mg) 
- 
IS 3025 (Part 46)* or 
R One Once in a week See Note 4 
  
IS 3025 (Part2) 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
-do- 
xv) Calcium (as Ca) 
- 
IS 3025 (Part 40)* or IS 
R One Once in a week See Note 4 
  
3025 (Part 2) 
-do- xvi) Sodium (as Na) - 
IS 3025 (Part 45)* or IS 
S One Once in six months See Note 6 
3025(Part 2) 
-do- xvii) Alkalinity (as HCO3) - IS 3025 (Part 23) R One Each control unit See Note 2 
-do- 
xviii) Selenium (as Se) 
- 
IS 15303* or IS 3025 
S One Once in six months See Note 6 
  
(Part 56) 
-do- xix) Mineral Oil - 6 of IS 3025 (Part 39) S One Once in a month See Note 5 
-do- 
xx) Phenolic compounds 
- 6 of IS 3025 (Part 43) S One Once in a month See Note 5 
(as C6H5OH) 
-do- 
xxi) Anionic surface active 
- Annex L of IS 13428 S One Once in a month See Note 5 
agents (as MBAS) 
6.2 and Table 3 i) Arsenic (as As) - IS 3025 (Part 37) S one Once in six months See Note 6 
-do- ii) Cadmium (as Cd) - IS 3025 (Part 41) S one Once in six months -do- 
-do- iii) Cyanide (as CN) - 2 of IS 3025 (Part 27) S one Once in six months -do- 
-do- 
iv) Chromium (as Cr) 
- 
Annex K IS 13428* or IS 
S one Once in six months -do- 
  
3025 (Part 2) 
-do- v) Mercury (as Hg) - IS 3025 (Part 48) S one Once in six months -do- 
-do- vi) Lead (as Pb) - IS 3025 (Part 47) S one Once in six months -do- 
-do- vii) Nickel (as Ni) - Annex M IS 13428 S one Once in six months -do- 
-do- 
viii) Polychlorinated 
- Annex N of IS 13428 S one Once in six months -do- 
Biphenyl (PCB) 
-do- 
ix) Polynuclear aromatic 
- APHA 6440 I S one Once in six months -do- 
hydrocarbons 
 
x) Uranium 
-=-- 
IS 3025(Part 65)* or  
IS 14194 (Part 3) 
S one -do- -do- 

 
 
        
PM/ 13428/ 3 
        
January 2023 
TEST DETAILS Test equipment LEVELS OF CONTROL 
REMARKS 
Clause Requirement Test Method 
requirement No. of 
Frequency 
R: required (or)S: Sample 
Clause Reference 
Sub-contracting 
 
permitted 
 
6.2 and Table 4 
i) Alpha emitters 
- IS 14194 (Part 2) S one 
Once in five 
 
  
years 
-do- 
ii) Beta emitters 
- IS 14194 (Part 1) S one 
Once in five 
 
  
years 
6.3 Pesticide Residues - Annex P of IS 13428**S 
 
One 
 
See Note 1 below 
Once in a year 
- Shelf Life Assessment B 6.9 Annex B of IS 13428 R 
Once in six months each 
See Note 8 below 
type of container shall be 
tested for shelf life 
assessment 
 
 
 
In case of dispute, methods given at column 4 and wherever indicated by “*” shall be the referee method. 
**Shall be got tested from BIS recognized laboratory using internationally established test method as specified in Annex P of IS 13428 : 2005 
 
Note 1: For tests with frequency of once in a year, in case any failure is observed, in the requirement of Pesticide Residues, then the next 3 consecutive samples (factory/market) 
of that licence shall be tested for all tests including Pesticide Residues(except Radioactive residues), till the 3 consecutive samples are found conforming to all requirements 
tested including pesticide residues. 
 
Note 2: In case of failure in any requirement with frequency of each control unit like colour, odour, taste, turbidity, Chloride, Sulphate, Alkalinity, after taking corrective 
action the frequency to be increased from each control unit to every four hours for one month. Thereafter frequency of each control unit may be restored if all the samples during 
the month are found passing. For pH, in case of failure, after taking corrective action, the frequency to be increased from every four hours to every hour for a week. Thereafter 
frequency of every 4 hours may be restored if all the samples during the week are found passing. 
 
Note 3: In case of failure in total dissolved solid, after taking corrective action, the frequency to be increased from each control unit to every four hours for one month. Thereafter 
frequency of each control unit may be restored if all the samples during the month are found passing. 
 
Note 4: In case of failure in Nitrate, Nitrite, Manganese, Copper, Calcium, Magnesium, Barium and Sulphide, after taking corrective action, the frequency to be increased from 
once in a week to each control unit for one month. Thereafter frequency of once in a week may be restored if all the samples during the month are found passing 

 
 
PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
Note 5: In case of failure in any requirement like Phenolic Compounds, Mineral Oil, Anionic surface active agents, Antimony, Borate, with frequency of once a month, after 
taking corrective actions, samples from 2 consecutive control units shall be tested in house or in BIS recognized third party lab. Thereafter frequency of once in a month may 
be restored if the samples from both control units are found passing. 
 
Note 6: In case of failure in any requirement like Fluoride, Silver, Selenium, Sodium, Mercury, Cadmium, Arsenic, Cyanide, Lead, Chromium, Nickel, PCB, PAH, Uranium 
with frequency of once in six months, the frequency to be increased from once in 6 months to once in 3 months for 6 months. Thereafter frequency of once in 6 months may be 
restored only if both the samples tested at each quarter are found passing. 
 
Note 7: Approved and validated international test methods from ISO/ APHA/ ASTM/ AOAC/EPA/EN may also be followed for performing tests given in Table 2 & 3 of 
IS 13428 : 2005. In case of dispute, methods given at column 4 and wherever indicated by “*” shall be the referee method. 
 
Note 8: Shelf Life testing shall be done in house for all possible tests for organoleptic, physico-chemical, chemical, and microbiological parameters which are possible to be 
tested in house as per test methods prescribed in IS 13428. Records of shelf life studies to be maintained. In case of failure, the manufacturer shall review the shelf life declaration 
and re-declare the suitable revised shelf life. 
 
Note-9: Whether test equipment is required or sub-contracting is permitted in column 2 shall be decided by the Bureau and shall be mandatory. Sub- contracting is permitted to 
a laboratory recognized by the Bureau or Government laboratories empaneled by the Bureau. 
 
Note-10: The control unit and levels of control as decided by the Bureau are obligatory to which the licensee shall comply with. 
 
Note -11: Whenever, due to failure, the test frequency is increased, the compliance for such frequency levels may be ensured either from in-house or OSL testing of samples. 

 
 
 
 
 
FORM 1 
REPORT FOR FOUR HOURLY pH TESTING 
 
Date of 
Production 
Batch 
Number/ 
Control unit 
number 
pH Remarks 
1 2 3 4 
    
 
 
FORM 2 
REPORT FOR DAILY/ EACH CONTROL UNIT TESTING 
PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
Date of Batch 
Colour Odour Taste Turbidity TDS Chloride Sulphate Alkalinity E.coli 
Coliform Sulphite Pseudo Yeast 
Remark 
    
monas & 
Production Number/ Bacteria reducing aerugin Mould 
  
control 
  
anaerobes 
osa 
 
 
unit 
    
 
number 
    
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
                
 
 
FORM 3 
REPORT FOR WEEKLY & MONTHLY TESTING 
 
Date 
Batch/ 
Barium Copper 
Mangan 
Nitrate Nitrite Calcium Sulphide Magnesium Antimony Borate 
Phenolic 
Mineral Oil 
Anionic 
Remarks 
 
ese Compounds Surface 
control 
  
Active 
unit no. 
  
Agents 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
FORM 4 
 
FORMAT FOR TESTING FROM BIS RECOGNIZED OUTSIDE LABORATORY 
 
Month & Year Batch No./DOM Type of packing 
Dates on which Lab to which Test report 
Results Remarks 
sample sent sample sent number & date 
        
 
 
1. REPORT FOR MONTHLY TEST 
 
i. Faecal streptococci and S. aureus, Salmonella and Shigella, V. cholera and V. parahaemolyticus 
 
ii. Mineral Oil, Anionic Surface Active Agents, Phenolic Compounds, Antimony, Borates, 
 
2. REPORT FOR SIX MONTHLY TEST 
 
i. Mercury, Cadmium, Arsenic, Cyanide, Lead, Chromium, Nickel, Fluoride, Selenium, Sodium, PCB, PAH. 
ii. Silver (as applicable) 
 
iii. Pesticide Residues 
 
 
3. REPORT FOR FIVE YEARLY TEST 
 
I. Radio Active Residues (Alpha and Beta Emitters) 

PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM 5 
 
SOURCE WATER TESTING (3 MONTHLY TESTS) 
 
Month Source of In-house testing Outside testing (if done) Record of in-house Results Remarks 
& Year water (if done) testing/outside TR 
   
Name of sample TR No. 
   
lab sent on & Date 
 
 
FORM 6 
 
RECORD FOR PLASTIC CONTAINERS USED FOR PACKING WATER 
 
Date of Type of Name of Quantity Whether Details of outside 
Results Remarks 
receipt packing supplier received ISI testing 
 
 
material 
  
marked 
  
     
Name of Date of Overall Colour Remaining 
 
lab sending migration migration parameters 
 
samples 
  
as per IS 
    
15410 
           
 
 
FORM 7 
 
RECORDS FOR SHELF LIFE ASSESSMENT (SEPARATE FOR EACH TYPE OF CONTAINER BEING USED) 
 
Date on which Batch Type of Declared shelf Periodicity of Date of Requirements 
Results Remarks 
sample kept No./DOM packing whose life testing Testing Tested 
  
sample kept 
    

 
 
 
 
FORM 8 
 FORMAT FOR PE  FILM 
PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
 
Date of Name of Quantity Details of Descriptio Film Winding 
Odour 
Thicknes 
Width 
Overall Tensile Elongation Dart 
Results Remark 
Receipt Supplier Receive Test report 
n 
Form 
of s 
Migratio Strength 
n Impact 
 
Film 
 
at Break Resistance 
  
d 
     
n 
   
of 
 
(No. of from O S 
        
Rolls  
Rolls) Lab. With 
        
   
date 
        
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) 
 
 
FORM 9 
FORMAT FOR POUCH TESTING 
 
Date of Time of Total quantity 
Drop Test 
Stack Load Ink Adhesion of Product Resistance Water 
Results Remarks 
Pouch production produced Test Printed Pouches of Potability 
Production 
    
Printed Pouches Test 
   
 
Machine No. 
    
   
1 2 3 4 Etc. 
    
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
 

 
 
 
 
TABLE 2 
PM/13428/ 3 
January 2023 
GUIDELINES ON ENSURING CONFORMITY OF CONTAINERS USED FOR PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER 
 
Type of container 
Parameters Options for mode of conformity Frequency to be followed by licensee 
a) Plastic Jars i) Overall migration and colour    
migration as per Clause 7 of IS 
13428  
 ii) Conformity to IS15410 
i) ‘ISI’ marked, OR 
ii) In-house Test Reports of 
licensee, if facilities exist; 
OR 
iii) BIS recognized outside 
laboratory Test Report of 
the samples (not older than 
6months from the date of 
purchase) ; OR 
iv) Combination of the above. 
Once in six months, sample from one  consignment of 
plastic jars of each size/material procured from a single 
source (i.e. supplier) shall be tested as per the modes of 
conformity given in column 3 (Not required 
if  material is ISI marked) 
b) Plastic Bottles, Glass/ 
cups 
i) Overall migration and colour    
migration as per Clause 7 of IS 
13428  
 ii) Conformity to IS 15410 
i) ‘ISI’ marked  
OR 
ii) In-house Test Reports of 
licensee, if facilities exist  
OR 
iii) BIS recognized outside laboratory 
Test Report of the samples (not older 
than 6months from the date of 
purchase) 
Once  in  six months,  sample  from  one consignment of 
plastic bottles/ glasses/ cups of each type/ shape/ 
capacity/ material procured from  a  single  source  (i.e. 
supplier) shall be tested as per the modes of conformity 
given in column 3 (Not required if material is ISI marked 
c) Plastic cap (closures) 
of containers 
Overall migration and colour 
migration as per Clause 7 of IS 
13428 
i) Declaration/ certificate w.r.t. 
food grade quality, as permitted under 
IS13428 , AND 
ii)In house test report of licensee, if 
facilities exist ; OR 
Once in six months, sample from one consignment of 
plastic caps/closures of each size/material procured 
from a single source (i.e. supplier) shall be tested as 
per the modes of conformity given in column 3 (Not 
required if material is ISI marked) 
 
 
iii)   BIS recognized outside laboratory 
test report of samples (not older than 
6months from the date of 
  purchase)  
   
  
 
  
 

 
 
PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
    
d) Foil (for sealing of 
plastic cups/ glasses) 
Overall migration and colour 
migration as per Clause 7 of IS 
13428:2005  
i) Declaration/ certificate w.r.t. food     
grade quality of the material used for 
the plastic film, AND 
Once in six months, sample from one consignment 
of one consignment of foils procured from a single 
source (i.e. supplier) shall be tested as per the 
modes of conformity given in column 3 (Not 
required if material is ISI marked) 
ii) In house test report of licensee, if  
 
facilities exist OR  
iii) BIS recognized Outside test report  
 
of samples (not older than 
 
 
6months from the date of 
 
 
purchase) 
 
 
 
Note : Licensee to keep records of receipt for all types of containers and closures received, along with the corresponding test certificate in case of ISI marked 
consignment or test reports of samples tested in-house or got tested as per the specified frequency at BIS recognized laboratory, to be verified by BIS during 
periodic inspections for adequacy of the system being followed by licensee to control quality of packaging material received, accepted, rejected and method of 
disposal. 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
July 2020 
 
 
TABLE 3 
Levels of control for Polyethylene Flexible Pouches for the packing of Packaged Natural Mineral Water as per IS 15609 
TEST DETAILS Test equipment LEVELS OF CONTROL 
Clause 
 
Requirement 
 
Test Method 
requirement 
 
 
Lot size 
 
Remarks (Modes of Conformity etc.) 
R: required No. of 
Clause Reference 
(or)S: Sub- Samples 
contracting 
 
permitted 
 
5 Material 5 IS 15609 S One 
Each consignment of i) ISI Marked, OR 
Polyethylene film ii) BIS recognized outside laboratory 
 
Test Report of the samples, OR 
 
iii) Test certificate issued by PE resin 
 
supplier. 
6.1 
 
Requirement for Polyethylene Film 
     
6.1.1 Description 6.1.1 IS 15609 R One 
Each roll of All rolls to be checked before using the 
polyethylene film same for making pouches. All such 
 
rolls which do not conform to the 
 
requirement shall be rejected 
6.1.2 Film Form 6.1.2 -do- R -do- -do- -do- 
6.1.3 Winding of film 6.1.3 -do- R -do- -do- -do- 
6.1.4 Odour 6.1.4 -do- R -do- -do- -do- 
6.1.5 Thickness 6.1.5 -do- R -do- -do- -do- 
6.1.6 Width 6.1.6 -do- R -do- -do- -do- 
 
 
 
 
6.1.7 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall Migration 
 
 
 
 
6.1.7 
 
 
 
 
-do- 
S 
 
 
 
 
 
-do- 
 
i) ISI Marked, OR 
 
ii) In house test report, if facility 
One consignment 
 
exist with the licensee OR 
from each source iii) Outside approved laboratory 
(i.e. supplier) initially 
 
test report of the sample 
and subsequently If the sample does not conform to the 
once every six requirement, the consignment shall be 
months for each rejected. 
source (i.e. supplier) 
 

PM/ 13428/ 3 
January 2023 
July 2020 
 
 
Table 3 contd... 
 
TEST DETAILS Test equipment LEVELS OF CONTROL 
 
Clause 
Requirement 
Test Method requirement No. of 
Lot size Remarks 
Clause Reference 
R: required Samples 
(or)S: Sub- 
 
contracting 
 
permitted 
 
6.1.8 Tensile strength 6.1.8 -do- S -do- -do- -do- 
6.1.9 Elongation of break 6.1.9 -do- S -do- -do- -do- 
6.1.10 
Dart impact 
6.1.10 -do- S -do- -do- -do- 
resistance 
 
7 Requirement for Flexible Pouches 
7.2 
Water Potability 
Annex E -do- S -do- Once in two months 
Sample of each size shall be tested by 
Test rotation so that all the sizes shall be tested 
 
in one operative period. 
7.3 Stack load Test Annex F -do- R -do- One day production 
If the sample does not conform to the 
requirement the same day production shall 
be rejected. 
7.4 Drop test Annex G -do- R -do- 
Every hour for each If the sample does not conform to the 
machine requirement, the licensee shall follow the 
 
criteria for acceptance and retesting as per 
 
clause G-3 of IS 15609:2005. If it still does 
 
not conform then the same day production 
 
shall be rejected. 
7.5 
Ink Adhesion of 
Annex H IS 15609 R -do- One day production 
If the sample does not conform to the 
Printed Pouches requirement the same day production 
 
shall be rejected. All rolls to be checked 
 
before using the same for making 
 
pouches. All such rolls which do not 
 
conform to the requirement shall be 
 
rejected. 
 
7.6 
Product resistance 
 
Annex J 
 
-do- 
R 
 
One 
 
-do- 
 
-do- of printed Pouches 

[Type here] 
PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
Note-1: Whether test equipment is required or sub-contracting is permitted in column 2 shall be decided by the Bureau and shall be mandatory. Sub-contracting is permitted to a 
laboratory recognized by the Bureau or Government laboratories empaneled by the Bureau.  
Note-2: Levels of control given in column 3 are only recommendatory in nature. The manufacturer may define the control unit/batch/lot and submit his own levels of control in 
column 3 with proper justification for the approval by BO Head.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[Type here] 
PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
TABLE 4 
Levels of control for Paperbased Multilayer Laminated/Extruded Composite Cartons (Aseptic and Non-Aseptic)  
For Processed Liquid Food Products and Beverages as per IS 17753 
 
TEST DETAILS Test equipment LEVELS OF CONTROL 
Requirement Test Method 
requirement 
 
Lot size Remarks (Modes of Conformity etc.) 
R: required 
(or)S: 
No. of 
Clause Reference 
Sub-contracting 
Samples 
permitted 
Material,  
Cl. 4.1 
4.1 IS 17753 S One 
Each consignment of 
paper based multilayer 
composite sheet 
i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
 
 
  
Paper Board, 
Cl. 4.1.1 
--- IS 16983/IS 1776/ IS 12999 S One Each consignment i) BIS recognized outside laboratory Test Report of 
the samples, OR 
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Polyethylene, 
Cl. 4.1.2 
--- IS 2508/IS 14500/ IS 10146/  
IS 16738 
S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Aluminium Foil, 
Cl. 4.1.3 
4.3 of IS 
IS 8970 
IS 8970 and Table 1 of IS 17753 S One Each consignment i) BIS recognized outside laboratory Test Report of 
the samples, OR 
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Caps,  
Cl. 4.1.4 
--- IS 10910 S One Each consignment i) ISI Marked, OR 
ii) BIS recognized outside laboratory Test Report 
of the samples, OR 
iii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Printing Inks,  
Cl. 4.1.6 
 IS 15495 S One Each consignment i) BIS recognized outside laboratory Test Report of 
the samples, OR 
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Requirement for Paper Based Multilayer Laminated/Extruded Composite Sheets 
Description,  
Cl. 5.1 
5.1 IS 17753 R One 
Every hour 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall Migration, 
Cl. 5.2.1 
---- IS 9845 
R -do- Once in a fortnight -do- 
Specific Migration ---- IS 9845 and IS 3025(Part-2)/  R -do- Every month -do- 

[Type here] 
PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
Test, 
Cl. 5.2.2 
IS 5158(A-4)/ IS 9873(Part-6) 
Vibration Leakage 
Test, 
Cl. 5.2.3 
Annex-B 
IS 17753 
R -do- Every 24 hours -do- 
Storage Test, 
Cl. 5.2.4 
--- 
IS 8639 
R -do- Every month -do- 
Water Vapour 
Transmission Rate 
(WVTR) and 
Oxygen Transmission 
Rate (OTR), Cl. 5.2.5 
Annex-C 
of IS 
17753 
IS 17753/ISO 2528(for WVTR) 
And 
ISO 15105-2(for OTR) 
R -do- Once in a fortnight -do- 
Print Resistance Test, 
Cl. 5.2.6 
Annex-D 
IS 17753 
R -do- Every 24 hours -do- 
Ink Adhesion Test 
Cl. 5.2.7 
Annex-E 
IS 17753 
R -do- Every 24 hours -do- 
 
 Note-1: Whether test equipment is required or sub-contracting is permitted in column 2 shall be decided by the Bureau and shall be mandatory. Sub-contracting is permitted to a 
laboratory recognized by the Bureau or Government laboratories empaneled by the Bureau.  
 
Note-2: Levels of control given in column 3 are only recommendatory in nature. The manufacturer may define the control unit/batch/lot and submit his own levels of control in 
column 3 with proper justification for the approval by BO Head 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[Type here] 
PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
TABLE 5 
Levels of control for Aluminium Cans for Packaged Natural Mineral Water and Packaged Drinking Water 
— Specification as per [Doc. No.: PGD 38(20182)] 
 
TEST DETAILS Test equipment LEVELS OF CONTROL 
Requirement Test Method 
requirement 
 
Lot size Remarks (Modes of Conformity etc.) 
R: required 
(or)S: 
No. of 
Clause Reference 
Sub-contracting 
Samples 
permitted 
Material,  
Cl. 5.1 
5.1 IS 504 (Part 1 to 12) and 
IS 504 (Part 13 to 16) 
S One 
Each consignment of 
 
paper based multilayer 
composite sheet 
i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR 
 ii) Test certificate issued by supplier. 
  
Temper, 
Cl. 5.2 
--- IS 16983/IS 1776/ IS 12999 S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR 
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Mechanical properties of the 
alloys for the body and 
closure, 
Cl. 5.3 
--- IS 2508/IS 14500/ IS 10146/  
IS 16738 
S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR 
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Can bod, 
Cl. 6.1.1 
6.1.1 PGD 38(20182)    By visual  
Can Ends 
Cl. 6.1.2 
6.1.2 PGD 38(20182) S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR 
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Internal finish 
Cl. 6.2 
6.2 PGD 38(20182)    By visual 
a) External Coating 
Cl. 6.3 
b) Bottom Rim 
Coating 
Cl. 6.1.3 
a) 6.3 
 
b) 6.1.3 
PGD 38(20182) S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR 
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
a) Shape and 
Dimension 
b) Wall thickness 
Cl. 6.4.1 
Table 3 PGD 38(20182) S One Each consignment i)Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Shape and nominal 
dimension of closure 
Table 4 PGD 38(20182) S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  

[Type here] 
PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
components 
Cl. 6.4.2 
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Top Load / Axial 
Load / Column 
Strength 
Cl. 7.1.1 
7.1.1 PGD 38(20182) S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Enamel Rater Criteria 
Cl. 7.1.2 
7.1.2 PGD 38(20182) S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Air Pressure Test 
Cl. 7.1.3 
--- IS 2471 S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Slip Angle Test / Wall 
Mobility Test 
Cl. 7.1.4 
Annex-B PGD 38(20182) S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Testing of Ends 
Cl. 7.2 
7.2 PGD 38(20182) S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Overall Migration 
Limit 
Cl. 7.3.1 
--- IS 9845 S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Specific Migration 
Limit 
Cl. 7.3.2 
--- IS 9845 S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
Water Potability Test 
Cl. 7.4 
--- IS 2500(Part-1) S One Each consignment i) Test Reports from BIS recognized outside 
laboratory, OR  
ii) Test certificate issued by supplier 
 
 
Note-1: Whether test equipment is required or sub-contracting is permitted in column 2 shall be decided by the Bureau and shall be mandatory. Sub-contracting is permitted to a 
laboratory recognized by the Bureau or Government laboratories empaneled by the Bureau.  
 
Note-2: Levels of control given in column 3 are only recommendatory in nature. The manufacturer may define the control unit/batch/lot and submit his own levels of control in 
column 3 with proper justification for the approval by BO Head 
 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
Annex G 
Guidelines for Special Situations 
 
G-1 Change of source of raw water or change in process 
As and when there is change in source water, it shall be intimated to BIS. The raw water collected from 
the new source shall be tested in accordance with Clause 7 of SIT and the processed water produced 
from such source water shall be tested for conformity to IS 13428 from BIS recognized outside lab. 
The reports of source water and the product water produced from the new source shall be submitted to 
BIS for approval before commissioning for regular production and marking. 
 
G-2 Modification in the process 
G-2.1  In  case  of  any  addition,  alteration  and/or  change  in  the  production  process  without  any 
change  in  raw  water source,  the  processed  water  produced  from  such  changed  process  shall  be 
tested  for  conformity  to  IS  13428  from  BIS  recognized  outside  lab.  The  reports  of  the  product 
water produced from the changed process shall be submitted to BIS for approval before 
commissioning for regular production and marking. 
G-2.2 Testing of product water so produced by using different processes shall be carried out as 
per SIT and records be kept separately by the licensee. 
Note  1:  Testing  for  parameters  concerning  radio-active residues  need  not  be  done  under  above 
circumstances provided the source of raw water remains the same. 
Note 2: Any change in process may require change of label. Therefore licensee may be advised 
to prepare fresh label incorporating all marking details. 
G-3 Shelf-life 
G-3.1 Declared shelf life for Natural Mineral Water in all type of packing materials shall not 
be less than 30 days. If the manufacturer intends to declare a longer shelf-life than minimum 30 
days, study shall be conducted on each type of packing whenever there is a change in the source 
of raw water/manufacturing/packing process, whichever is earlier. The shelf-life shall be declared 
on the labels as per 8.1 (g) of  IS 13428. It shall be based on in-house shelf life study for which 
proper records be maintained conforming to declared shelf life. 
 
G-3.2 Subsequently, for any change in the shelf life declared on the labels, the manufacturer shall 
inform  BIS  in  advance  along  with  shelf- life  study  reports  and  submit  fresh  label  for approval. 
Tests to be carried out for shelf life studies are requirements given in Table 1 of IS 13428 along 
with routine microbiological tests as per IS 13428. 
G-4 Label/marking approvals 
 
G-4.1There is a practice that applicants/licensees submit labels to BIS for approval. Wherever any 
applicant/licensee submits labels to BIS for approval, it shall be informed to them that the labels conforming to 
the marking details as mentioned in clause 8 of IS 13428 along with the brand names are to be submitted 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
to by licensees to BIS for information only, which will only be noted by BIS for records. 
 
G-4.2 The compliance of such labels to the requirement of clause 8 shall be ensured by licensees. However, 
in  case  non-compliance  to Clause  8  is  observed  by  BIS  and  communicated  in  writing  (provided brand 
name/trademark is not registered) to licensee, licensee shall make necessary rectification and resubmit the 
label for confirmation to concerned BIS Branch Office within 15 days. Decision of BIS regarding whether 
labeling is complying or not with clause 8 of IS 13428 shall be final. 
 
G-4.3 However, in case the brand name/trademark submitted by the firm is a registered brand 
name/trademark, no objection to its use shall be raised even if the brand name/trademark is found to be in 
non-compliance  to  Clause  8.  However,  in  such  a  case,  the  Head  BO  concerned  shall  communicate  the 
details of such cases to CMD-2 for taking up with the concerned authorities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
Annex H 
 
CHECKLIST FOR GOOD HYGIENE PRACTICES AND FOOD SAFETY SYSTEMS FOR 
 PACKAGED NATURAL MINERAL WATER PROCESSING UNITS 
 
    SI No.                                        Requirements     
 
     (1)                                                 (2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Answers 
         
    Remarks 
 
 
 
       (5) 
Adequate 
     
    (3) 
Not 
Adequate 
  (4)   
i) Building, Facilities and Locations 
 
a) Is the facility location area free from objectionable odour, smoke, 
dust or other contaminants and not subject to flooding? 
b) Are  the  areas  immediately  surrounding  the buildings,  roads, 
packing places, suitably paved, grassed and kept clean? 
c) Is adequate  facility for drainage  of surroundings available  and is 
designed to handle peak load? 
d) Is  the  facility  used  for  processing  water,  free  from  Domestic 
animals? 
e) Is the facility surroundings free from refuse, waste materials, 
rubbish, overgrown weeds and grasses? 
f) Are there adequate facilities for the disposal of effluents and 
wastes? 
g) Are the buildings and facilities of sound construction and 
maintained in good repair? 
h) Are the buildings and facilities designed and maintained to prevent 
entrance and harboring of pests and entry of contaminants? 
i) Are building and facilities designed to facilitate Hygienic 
operations? 
 
ii) Plant and Physical Facilities 
 
 a)  Is  adequate  lighting  provided  at  working  station,  hand  washing 
area, and storage areas?  
b)   Are   light   fixtures   safety   type   and   protected   to   prevent   
contamination  in  the  event  of  breakage  in  the  processing  and 
packing area? 
c)      Are  the  processing  areas  well-ventilated,  to  minimize  odours  , 
noxious fumes and condensates? 
d)   Are the barriers/traps provided at drains to prevent the  entry of 
rodents from the drains into the facility? 
         e)    Is effective screening provided against entry of birds, animals,   
                insects, rodents, etc 
 
   
 
f)      Are   doors,   hatches   and   other   openings   to   the   building 
constructed to render opening pest proof? 
g)    Are floors, walls, ceilings, windows and doors so designed and 
constructed as to render them washable? 
h)    Is product in process and storage area adequately   protected from 
any   leakage   from   external   surfaces   and   other   sources   of 
contamination? 
i)   Are immediate surroundings of extraction or collection   protected 
from entry of unauthorized persons? 
 
iii) Raw Water Processing 
 
a)    In case of extraction/collection for processing are the sources free 
from contaminations/ impurities? 
   

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
b)   Are  water storage tanks, pipe lines utilized for handling water 
constructed  and  so  designed  as  to  facilitate cleaning  and 
inspection? 
c)        Are  inspections  of  containers/carriers/pipe  lines  of  raw  water 
supply   performed   for   the   material   of   construction   and 
cleanliness? 
d)      Are  possible  chances  of  contamination  from  incoming  water 
assessed? 
e)   Are  water storage tanks regularly cleaned and records maintained 
to prevent entry of pests and potential contaminator? 
f)        Are  the  processed  water  contact  surfaces  regularly  cleaned  and 
sanitized and records maintained?  
 
iv) Post-processing Handling 
 
a)    Are  cleaning  operation  of  bottles/containers  so  done  as  to 
preclude      contamination  of  product  and  product  contact 
services with residues? 
b)   Has absence of residual cleaning chemicals been ensured?  
c)   Is preventive maintenance in place for all   processing machinery 
and equipment? 
d)  Are  the  primary  packing  materials  and  containers  of  food  grade 
conforming to relevant Indian Standards? 
e)   Are packing and sealing, where required, monitored? 
f)  Are physical hazards prevented from entering into processed water? 
        g)   Are glassware excluded from production area? 
 
v) Packaging Material and Finished Goods Storage 
 
a) Are the primary packing materials and containers of food grade 
conforming to relevant Indian Standards? 
b)   Are the packaging materials inspected to ensure their suitability? 
c)  Are the packing materials especially primary packing material  
      properly stored and properly handled to preclude contamination? 
d)  Are the packaging materials purchased, stored and handled in  
      sanitary manner? 
 
vi) Finished Product Storage and Distribution 
 
a) Is first-in-first out (FIFO) of stored product maintained? 
b) Is storage properly sanitized and disinfected periodically? 
c) Are stores protected from pest infestations? 
d) Are coding and tracking clear and in place? 
e) Are the instruction clear and in place? 
f) Are hold/release procedure in place and product identified? 
g) Are the records maintained for batch number, date of and volume 
of production? 
h) Are transport containers/vehicles maintained in clean condition? 
 
vii) Customer Handling of Products 
 
a) Are the storage instructions provided on containers? 
b) Is the shelf life period/best before mentioned on containers ? 
c) Are instructions provided for handling defective/damaged products? 
 
     viii) Sanitary Facilities and Control 
 
a) Are   toilets   provided   in   sufficient   numbers   and   are   they 
provided  with: 
1) Doors of self-closing type? 
2) Do not open directly into processing areas? 
3) Hand washing signs provided in appropriate language? 

PM/13428/3 
January 2023 
 
 
 
4) Proper lighting and ventilation? 
5) Proper maintenance to keep in clean and tidy manner? 
b) Are   hand   washing   facilities   provided   adequately   and 
conveniently  to  wash  hands,  foot,  elbow  or  sensor  operated 
taps?  
c) Are  germicidal  soaps/soap  solution  and  hand  drying facility 
provided? 
d)    Are notice/ instructions prominently pasted in toilet directing 
employees to wash their hands on entry and re-entry into the 
packaged drinking water handling areas?  
e)   Are the refuse receptacles self closing type maintained in a 
manner to protect from contaminations? 
 
          ix) Personnel Hygiene and Habits 
 
a) Is any individual assigned to supervise overall sanitation of plant 
and personnel? 
b)  Is  there  any  person  responsible  for  day-to-day  monitoring  of 
health and hygiene? 
c)  Are  the  medical  records  of  the  employees  in  processing, 
packing and maintenance been periodically maintained? 
 d) Are  the  personnel  with infectious diseases, skin infection and 
open  lesion  or  any  other  source  of  microbial      contamination 
excluded from working in process/packing areas?  
 e)   Are   the   following   personnel   hygiene   practices   regularly 
maintained and monitored: 
1) Clean outer garments- protective clothing? 
2) Personal cleanliness-finger nails? 
3)  Head  cover-hair  restraints,  caps,  head  bands,  beard 
cover? 
4) No tobacco in any form-smoking, chewing? 
5) No eating at work stations? 
f) Are protective clothing stored on the premises and not allowed to 
be used for outside wear? 
g) Are there clear legible notices defining limits of no smoking areas 
such as ‘NO SMOKING BEYOND THIS POINT’ displayed? 
            h)  Have  the  personnel  been  imparted  training  or  hygienic  food 
handling, processing food and personal hygiene?    
            i) Are unsecured jewellery and other objects such as wrist watches, 
cufflinks,  ear  rings,  glass  bangles,  stick  BINDIS  removed  at 
work? 
 
 
CONCLUSION: OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF HYGIENIC CONDITIONS –  
   SATISFACTORY/ NOT SATISFACTORY